Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. 2017. T. 6. № 3

ТЕОРИЯ ЖУРНАЛИСТИКИ 
THEORY OF JOURNALISM

УДК 070.11
DOI 10.17150/2308-6203.2017.6(3).267-286

Alexander P. Sukhodolov 
DSc in Economics, Professor, Rector 
Baikal State University, 
11 Lenin St., 664003, Irkutsk, Russian Federation,
e-mail: rector@bgu.ru

Суходолов Александр Петрович 
доктор экономических наук, профессор, ректор 
Байкальский государственный университет, 
664003, Российская Федерация, г. Иркутск, ул. Ленина, 11, 
e-mail: rector@bgu.ru 

Mikhail P. Rachkov 
DSc in Economics, Professor, Senior Editor of Theoretical  
and Practical Issues of Journalism
Baikal State University,
11 Lenin Str., Irkutsk, 664003, Russia,
e-mail: mpr17@yandex.ru

Рачков Михаил Парфирьевич 
доктор экономических наук, профессор, главный редактор 
журнала «Вопросы теории и практики журналистики»
Байкальский государственный университет,  
664003, Российская Федерация, г. Иркутск, ул. Ленина, 11,  
e-mail: mpr17@yandex.ru

MEDIOLOGY AS A SCIENCE OF THE FUTURE
(an invitation to continue the discussion started in this journal in 2016)

Abstract. Some preliminary conclusions of the media theory discussion 
started in 2016 and continued at the beginning of 2017 within the covers of 
the journal Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism are drawn. The 
ideas of systematization and structuring of knowledge on mass media stated 
by the authors are clarified and developed, i. e. alongside mass media theory 
and journalism theory, it is proposed to single out a theory of media system 
management. The necessity of theoretical reflection of the modern media 
system as a high-speed dynamic system is emphasized, which, in turn, is 
impossible without applying mathematical methods. It is pointed out that the 
potential of national mass media science ensures its international priority in 
media research. The authors consider that the media science, which they call 
mediology, is becoming one of the most prospective and important sciences 
of the future.

Keywords. Mediology, media system, journalism, management theory, 
scholarly discussion.

© А. П. Суходолов, М. П. Рачков, 2017 267



Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2017, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 267–286

Article info. Received March 27, 2017; accepted April 19, 2017; available 
online June 08, 2017.

Аннотация. Подводятся предварительные итоги дискуссии о теории 
средств массовой информации, развернувшейся на страницах журнала 
«Вопросы теории и практики журналистики» в 2016-м — начале 2017 г. 
Уточняются и развиваются заявленные ранее авторами идеи системати-
зации и структурирования накопленных знаний о массмедиа, в частности 
предлагается наряду с теорией средств массовой информации и теори-
ей журналистики выделить теорию управления системой СМИ. Особый 
акцент делается на необходимости оперативного теоретического ос-
мысления современной системы СМИ как одной из высокоскоростных 
динамических систем, что невозможно без применения математических 
методов. Отмечается, что потенциал отечественной науки о массмедиа 
позволяет ей обеспечить международный приоритет в исследованиях 
медиасферы. Авторы считают, что наука о массмедиа, которую они на-
зывают медиалогией, выдвигается в разряд самых перспективных и вос-
требованных наук будущего.

Ключевые слова. Медиалогия, медиасистема, журналистика, тео-
рия управления, научные дискуссии.

Информация о статье. Дата поступления 27 марта 2017 г.; дата 
принятия к печати 19 апреля 2017 г.; дата онлайн-размещения 08 июня 
2017 г.

To create a theory of the media: University, Louisa G. Svitich, an as-
statement of the problem was the sociate member of the Russian Acad-
headline of the article published in the emy of Education, Elena L. Vartanova, 
first issue of Theoretical and Practi- Dean of the Faculty of Journalism of 
cal Issues of Journalism in 2016. This Moscow State University, Denis V. Du-
was more a report the authors made nas, a senior research associate of 
at a collaborative meeting of Depart- Moscow State University, who defend-
ment of Journalism and Economics of ed the thesis The Development and the 
Mass Media, Department of Computer Current State of Theoretical Studies of 
Science and Cybernetics, Department Journalism and the Media in Russia. 
of Mathematics and Econometrics of Behind the scenes of the discussion, 
Baikal State University on 26 Novem- there was its hidden facilitator Mikhail 
ber 2015 [1]. Among our colleagues, V. Shkondin, the luminary of the nation-
scholars in Economics, who have par- al theory of journalism, and for this we 
ticipated in the discussion started in are deeply grateful to him.
2016 and continued at the beginning With the participants of the discus-
of 2017 within the covers of the jour- sion’s indulgence, we would like to 
nal Theoretical and Practical Issues make conclusions, express our opinion 
of Journalism there are Elena G. Pop- on disputable issues and outline further 
kova (Volgograd), Alexander S. Natzu- research aimed at creating a general-
bidze (Moscow), and also such known izing science on mass media, i. e. me-
authorities in the field of journalism diology, which is a synthesis of theory 
theory as Sergey G. Korkonosenko, of mass media as a dynamic system, 
a professor of Saint-Petersburg State theory of journalism and media sys-

268 ISSN 2308-6203



Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. 2017. T. 6. № 3. С. 267–286

tems, and media process management However, we beg to differ, as we do 
theory as a supplement to the above not intend to create a mass media the-
two theories. ory exclusively for Russia and isolated 

Here are several theses which from the world’s scientific academic 
have already been discussed and / or community. While criticizing our con-
can be further discussed. cept Denis V. Dunas tends to exagger-

ate here. We state the task as follows, 
I. There is currently no need for «…to prioritize Russian scholars in one 

creating a mass media theory of the most prospective and important 
The reason for this, according areas of research» [1, p. 11] instead of 

to Elena G. Popkova and Alexander endlessly repeating outdated foreign 
S. Natzubidze, is the following: «he theories of mass communication. We 
conceptual basics of mass media the- are stating the need to create not just 
ory have been laid by many foreign a theory of mass media, but rather a 
authors, and, therefore, nowadays one theory of mass media as a dynamic 
does not need to create mass media system requiring the application of 
theory, but develop it in the context of mathematical methods, which will al-
recent developments» [2, p. 526]. The low forecasting of this system’s devel-
modern author Denis V. Dunas is even opment as well as manage this system 
more straightforward here saying that, effectively.
«Mass media theory was created in No one intends to diminish Denis 
1983 by the famous British scholar De- McQuail’s authority and his major work 
nis McQuail. Mass Communication Theory. We are 

<…> In the last thirty-three years planning to publish several review ar-
there has been no book on mass me- ticles on McQuail’s Mass Communi-
dia theory more popular and acknowl- cation Theory in our journal as until 
edged than the one by McQuail. Even now the book has not been translated 
at the current stage of development of into Russian and is unlikely to ever be 
mass media theory McQuail’s theo- translated. However, we need break-
retical grounds are still relevant. There- through publications in mediolology by 
fore, it is not advisable to reconsider Russian scholars published not only in 
them. <…> Russian scholars have no Russian, but in English, French, Chi-
good reason to believe that McQuail’s nese and other languages. This is a 
theory is not applicable to the Rus- truly challenging task for a promising 
sian environment. Creating a new sys- young scholar, i. e. to become a Rus-
temic theory artificially and specially sian McQuail himself. We strongly be-
for Russia is hardly possible. At least lieve that Denis V. Dunas is up to the 
such a theory is unlikely to be viable» task.
[3, p. 35]. Denis V. Dunas continues, 
«Theoretical knowledge in the field of II. Mass media theory and jour-
journalism and mass media in terms of nalism theory are at the stage of es-
modern social development and scien- tablishing themselves.
tific progress is unified. There cannot This fair assessment of the cur-
be two mass media theories nowa- rent state of the research in the field of 
days, i. e. one for Russia and another the media was given in the article On 
for the rest of the world» [3, p. 36]. Actualizing Theory of Journalism and 

ISSN 2308-6203 269



Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2017, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 267–286

Theory of Mass Media Theory by Ele- ses stated in that article with the fol-
na L. Vartanova, an associate member lowing:
of the Russian Academy of Education 1. An integral media system based 
[4]. Theory of Journalism, according on a universal digital technology start-
to the author, ‘is still establishing itself ed forming in the world as well as in 
not only in Russia, but also abroad’ [4, Russia only at the beginning of the 21st 
p. 6]. «…Russian scholars discuss it, century. 
argue about it, but this still has not re- According to Elena L. Vartanova 
sulted in publishing dictionaries, course «it is obvious that transferring media 
books, or key monographs», states the content into a universal and, namely, 
author. What do we have then? digital form as well as processes of 

We have Introduction to Theory convergence of technological media 
of Journalism [5]. Introduction to the platforms and the previously separate 
theory of journalism is a very precise media, IT and telecommunications; 
definition of what media science has involving audiences in the process of 
achieved nowadays in Russia. West- producing and spreading the context 
ern media science has the same, i. e. has not only expanded the media sys-
The Media. An Introduction (a course tem’s limits but has also demanded re-
book for university students) [6]. But an thinking it» [8, p. 9] — and we add, this 
introduction to a theory is not a com- has also demanded renewed systemic 
plete systemic theory like, for instance, theoretical reflection.
Economics, which includes such sys- 2. A media system, both while de-
tematically developed and structurally veloping and when already developed, 
interconnected subdisciplines as Mi- is a highly dynamic system required to 
croeconomics, Macroeconomics and be theorized sufficiently quickly. A me-
Global Economics. dia theory (let us use this term here) 

In this way, today we have an in- has to catch up with a media system 
troduction to media theory and some dynamic development, and this is not 
theoretical and empirical research into possible for a media theory if it applies 
the media field which is definite prog- old, mainly theoretical/ speculative 
ress resulting in such high profile works and empiric-descriptive methods. The 
being published as The Phenomenon old ‘luxury’ of decades-long academic 
of Journalism, a monograph by Louisa research into the media is completely 
G. Svitich and The Media System of out-of-date nowadays.
Russia, a course book edited by Elena 3. Timely study of a media system 
L. Vartanova [8]. as one of the most high-speed dynamic 

Let us try to answer the question systems is impossible without apply-
of why there are still no finalized theo- ing mathematical methods. One can 
ries of the media and journalism. We speed up the process of theorizing only 
were trying to answer this question with the help of these methods, substi-
in the article Why Sergey Kapitsa did tuting millions of words and thousands 
not become a member of the Russian of academic texts with several dozens 
Academy of Education published in of mathematical formulas and equa-
co-authorship with Anna M. Bychkova tions. Mathematics has never been ap-
in Theoretical and Practical Issues of plied to mass media theory due to the 
Journalism [9]. Let us update the the- fact that the main subject for research 

270 ISSN 2308-6203



Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. 2017. T. 6. № 3. С. 267–286

has always been not a media system in the media structure with changes in 
but journalism, i. e. its content, creativ- the advertising market. In the research 
ity and freedom. Freedom, creativity, we attempt to formally describe the 
content and no mathematics, i. e. no dynamics of the media channels’ de-
formalizing. velopment with the help of a system of 

The first scholar to understand ordinary differential equations, where 
that, in journalism theory, one cannot the amounts of investments are phase 
do without formalizing even such an variables. Applying methods of nonlin-
individual and creative work as a jour- ear dynamics allows to study in detail 
nalistic text was Evgeniy P. Prokhorov. the structure and properties of evolu-
It was he who divided a journalistic text tionary processes in such a system as 
into descriptive (d), valuative (v), nor- the media» [11, p. 825].
mative (N) and prescriptive (p) compo- A conclusion made by the authors 
nents in the early issues of his famous with the help of a system of ordinary 
Introduction to Journalism Theory. De- differential equations takes just one 
noting the text as a semiotic system paragraph of the body of the article, 
S (d, v, N, p) he showed that a differ- «Development trajectories of each kind 
ent set of components and their com- of mass media are approximately the 
binations illustrate not only the real same. Each kind of mass media starts 
structure of a journalistic text and how gradually declining on reaching its cli-
it can be perceived by audiences, but max. This being stated, reaching the 
also the creativity of the journalist [10, climax is rather fast, meanwhile the 
p. 38‒40]. Like linguistics, mathematics process of declining can last for de-
should become a sister of jour nalism. cades. Nowadays 80 per cent of mass 

After our report on 26 November, media are declining… <…> …they 
2015, where we made the need for continue producing the majority of the 
mathematizing media research the top information product due to the inertia of 
priority, two researchers from the De- the recent years. New types of mass 
partment of Mathematics and Econo- media not only contribute to the growth 
metrics of Baikal State University, who of the advertising market but are also 
had never studied the media before, the reason for its redistribution, old 
published a very interesting article, information channels form a system 
The Evolutionary Approach to Mass where funding is gradually finishing» 
Media Development: Building a Math- [11, p. 828–829]. It should be noted 
ematical Model [11]. In the annotation that this conclusion, which is important 
to the article the authors state, «One both theoretically and practically, would 
of the key peculiarities of the mass me- have been impossible to make in such 
dia is giving advertisers access to gen- a concise, clear and quick way without 
eral or specific members of the public. using mathematical methods. We are 
The structure of the advertising market convinced that the real development 
itself reflects the dynamics of what is of the media theory will start once we 
happening in the media industry, as continue mathematizing it. At the same 
the cost of advertising time depends time we will bear in mind the warning 
on how attractive to the audience the made by our colleagues Elena G. Pop-
media channel is. This fact made us kova and Alexander S. Natzubidze, 
suggest an idea to connect changes i. e. «overmathematizing» does harm 

ISSN 2308-6203 271



Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2017, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 267–286

to those representing humanities, arts wrong! The historic-genetic approach 
and social sciences» [2, p. 526]. even fully coincides with our views on 

which approach is to be a top priority 
III. What is primary: media theo- in terms of developing media theory 

ry or journalism theory? and journalism theory. The well-known 
This question has never been raised essay by the German historian-econ-

before either in home journalism (intro- omist Karl Buecher on the grounds of 
duction to journalism) theory or foreign the printed press from his book Die 
mass communication theories. Jour- Entstehung der Volkswirtschaft (The 
nalism and mass media used to merge Rise of the National Economy) first of 
into one whole as the content of infor- all analyzed a newspaper as a public 
mation activity and ways (channels) of institution, not a product of journalism 
disseminating mass information. Elena [13]. It is remarkable that K. Buecher 
L. Vartanova aptly notes that the me- founded the first Institute for Newspa-
dia have required special attention to per Science at the University of Leipzig.
themselves because of their trans- And as for Four Theories of the 
forming into a complex media system, Press by American scholars Fred 
a separate branch of economy, thus S. Siebert, Theodore Peterson and 
highlighting the need to consider the Wilbur Schramm, do they not state 
media in a broader aspect, not just as in their book that they mean «all the 
the sphere of journalist activity. Accord- mass media» by the press [14, p. 15]? 
ing to Vartanova, journalism cannot be Therefore, there is nothing new about 
viewed as a self-sustaining activity. On the idea that the analysis of journalism 
the contrary, it needs to be fitted in a should be started with analyzing the 
broad scientific, social and media in- press and the media as a social insti-
dustry context [4, p. 8]. tution, and then as a media industry 

We wrote in our article that journal- and a media system. The situational 
ism is a mass information activity which and probabilistic approaches, in our 
institutionalizes in the media system opinion, are directly related to math-
and does exist apart from the function- ematical modelling of media activity. 
ing and developing of the media. That We will consider below the normative 
is why, in order to study journalism one approach, which fits well in the media 
needs to understand what the media management theory.
are, i. e. if we apply logics, the media 
study should precede the study of jour- IV. Systemic management of the 
nalism [1, p. 8]. media and torrents of information is 

Professor Sergey G. Korkonosen- viewed as restriction of rights and 
ko considered this approach too «cat- freedoms of citizens and journalists’ 
egorical» while setting priorities in fa- creativity
vour of our proposed study paradigm. This is one of the key points of the 
«Followers of different approaches discussion which needs to be clari-
may disagree, what makes, for in- fied together with respected Sergey 
stance, historic-genetic, probabilistic, G. Korkonosenko. Reading his pub-
situational, normative and other ap- lications one can’t help admiring his 
proaches wrong?» asks Korkonosenko wide area of research and his refined 
[12, p. 537‒538]. Nothing makes them scientific views. Taking into account his 

272 ISSN 2308-6203



Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. 2017. T. 6. № 3. С. 267–286

scientific views one can say that he is with. However, we absolutely cannot 
a classical representative of liberal uni- agree that in this context «it is unlike-
versity scholars. This is our personal ly to be appropriate to give the media 
opinion, however, it is necessary here management a top priority». This is 
to understand the essence of the ar- sheer idealism!
gument. Meanwhile, we do not have Yes, there are laws and informal 
any negative connotation for the word institutions regulating the media, but 
«liberal». To be a Russian university there are also technologies and funds 
professor and not to be liberal is non- and other means which allow destruc-
sense. The liberalism of university pro- tive powers to use the media to manip-
fessors is a natural reaction to bureau- ulate public opinion, misinform people, 
cracy which is ineradicable in Russian and to undermine public and national 
society, however, which is being liberal- security. And, if we do not know the 
ized by the high morals of the mentors media management mechanisms, if 
of those university students who have, we have no idea of who they could be 
also and first of all, chosen journalism used by, how they could be used and 
as their future profession. Journalists what they could be used for, i. e. we are 
are more often inclined to face up to red not familiar with media management 
tape and cut through it. Therefore, it is theory, what will we have then? Profes-
no coincidence that Sergey G. Korko- sor Korkonosenko pays a lot of atten-
nosenko is concerned about the con- tion to the necessity and importance 
cept proposed by us due to its being of using normative journalism theories, 
aimed at media system management. recognizing values and a model code 

«…There are doubts, — Sergey of conduct for journalists and other 
G. Korkonosenko writes, — as whether media workers [15, p. 60–81], but this 
to consider media system manage- proves once again that the manage-
ment a top priority. And if one listens ment approach to the media theory is 
unsystematically to a wide-spread in naturally complemented by the norma-
modern society opinion on a person’s tive approach, including it in the system 
self-expression being a top priority, in- of media science.
cluding a person’s self-expression via And the last thing which we would 
the press? <…> One can also view like to bring into the discussion with the 
journalism as a spiritual cultural phe- respected professor, before finishing 
nomenon, national and worldwide, as this discussion. We have no intention 
a sphere of professional creativity, as of making the proposed project media 
a repository of historical memory… In theory a «monopoly» media theory [12, 
these and other contexts it is unlikely to p. 540]. What differentiates a science 
be appropriate to give a top priority to from a company of soldiers, marching 
media management» [12, p. 538]. in lockstep with their lieutenant is as 

The Russian journalism maitre’s follows: no one parades there: some-
concerns are understandable. Due to one always outmarches somebody, 
its specifics journalism remains a not someone, on the contrary, lags behind, 
completely red-taped sphere of pub- someone gropes their way, and some-
lic creative activity, and, therefore, it one takes a different direction. And, of 
should be protected from being over- course, there is no lieutenant making 
regulated and externally interfered everyone march in step with him.

ISSN 2308-6203 273



Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2017, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 267–286

V. On the terms «the media» and information. The answer seems obvi-
«mass media» ous. However, whose means are they, 

The thing that catches the eye, first who are they used by, what are they 
of all, is a shy irony of some partici- used for? In terms of the Soviet tradi-
pants of the discussion about the Rus- tion they are the state and the Com-
sian term СМИ (mass information me- munist party means, used to affect 
dia) which was passed down to us from the public conscience, to shape public 
the Soviet epoch, where it was СМИП opinion, for propaganda and agitation, 
(mass information and propaganda i. e. used as an instrument to govern 
media) first and then became СМИ a society. In terms of post-Soviet tra-
[3, p. 33; 12, p. 538]. Throughout the dition, the media were first an instru-
Western world they use the term mass ment in the hands of oligarchic groups, 
media, or, more often, just the media, making them highly competitive in 
mass communications theory is based their struggle to be able to influence 
on this term. We should use this very the government. Then (after the Kursk 
term as the more appropriate analogue submarine disaster in August 2000 and 
of the Russian term СМИ. a mass information attack by presump-

Meanwhile, each of the terms has a tuous oligarchs on President Vladimir 
right to exist as both of them are affect- Putin) a process of the leading media 

channels going under government 
ed by historical and national peculiari- control started. According to V. D. So-
ties of the USA and Russia, which do lovey, this process resulted in forming 
not allow these two terms to be com- a media-political system in Russia — 
pletely synonymous. a symbiosis of the authorities and the 

As for social sciences, to which media. «The main principles of this 
media science and journalism science system are: the authorities shape the 
belong, there will always be national main political strategy of the media, the 
specifics in terminology to a certain ex- media are loyal to the authorities and 
tent, that is why to be shy to use home are one of their supporters, the au-
terms or ignore them is hardly reason- thorities do not interfere in the media 
able. Another thing, as L. G. Svitich business» [17, p. 31].
notices, is that in the context of inter- If we give a word-for-word transla-
national scientific discussion and com- tion to the Russian abbreviation СМИ 
munication there arises a question, i. e. into English, we will get mass infor-
«How can one fit terminologically and mation media, however, such a collo-
conceptually in the global scientific the- cation is not used in the English lan-
saurus without sacrificing home scien- guage, the English language has the 
tific traditions and civilized mentality?» collocation mass communication me-
[16, p. 549‒550]. dia, but this is not exactly the same as 

What kind of specifics do the Rus- СМИ, i. e. the media. American mass 
sian term СМИ (i. e. mass information media were started as private busi-
media) and the English term mass ness institutions working as a media-
media reflect? The three-word Rus- tor in mass communication processes 
sian abbreviation has the word «me- selling the information required to 
dia», «means» in the first place. What the immigrants arriving in the USA. 
are they media, means of? — of mass Therefore, the term mass media ini-

274 ISSN 2308-6203



Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. 2017. T. 6. № 3. С. 267–286

tially implied an idea different from the VI. What name should be given 
straightforwardness of the term СМИ, to the study of mass media
i. e. mass information media (i. e. tools, It should be one word: mediology. 
instruments). The essence of it is expressed with the 

Elena L. Vartanova cites a famous help of the mysterious phrase by a fa-
statement by Herbert Marshall McLu- mous Canadian: «The medium is the 
han: «The medium is the message», message», which can be translated as 
which is translated into Russian differ- follows as well: the medium is the con-
ently. On the translations is the follow- tents itself (contains journalism as an 
ing: «The mediator is the message» [8, operation-activity process). Mediology, 
p. 7], i. e. the message (information) is as we view it, is a synthesis of media 
considered a mediator in the process 
of communication, but not a medium theory and journalism theory with me-
(i. e. an instrument) used for commu- dia management theory on top. Finally, 
nication processes management. It mediology aims to ensure a healthy 
was this way since the press inception way of living for humanity in the system 
in Northern America (from the end of of global social communications. This 
the 17th century until the beginning of task is impossible to achieve without 
the 18th century) until the mid-20th cen- working out media management theo-
tury, when to the American public con- ry, and without training a new genera-
sternation it was discovered that free tion of honest journalists on its basis, 
mass media stopped being just a me- who will be representatives of humane 
diator and transformed into an instru- journalism.
ment, a medium used by an immedi- In terms of its social significance 
ate circle of people owning the media mediology becomes one of the most 
exclusively. prioritized research areas in the world. 

Nowadays, when the Western That is why we consider mediology a 
world has been faced with the horren- science of the future in the most sig-
dous phenomenon of wide-scale news nificant sense of this word. But we 
faking, the abbreviation of СМИП (i. e. also call it a science of the future in its 
mass information and propaganda me- down-to-earth sense, as nowadays we 
dia), not just СМИ, is more suitable for can only speak of the process of estab-
American and European mass media. lishment of this science. It has not yet 
Taking into account the nuances point- resulted in a formalized research area, 
ed out, it is appropriate, in our opinion, or serious course books where mediol-
to use the terms mass media and СМИ ogy would be systematized. However, 
(i. e. mass information media), which the process of creating a science on 
are now very similar and are likely to mass media, as it was stated above, 
become identical. The discussion on will be developing rapidly and Russian 
mass media theory terminology and scholars should not lag behind their 
conceptual framework shows how im- colleagues from other countries.
portant it is now for linguists to par- The Russian scientific school of 
ticipate in this discussion. There must media and journalism has the neces-
have been a good reason for a smart sary potential to lead this process and 
person to state that linguistics is jour- accelerate it, carrying out complex in-
nalism’s sister. terdisciplinary research.

ISSN 2308-6203 275



Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2017, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 267–286

МЕДИАЛОГИЯ — НАУКА БУДУЩЕГО
(приглашение к продолжению дискуссии,  

начатой журналом в 2016 г.)

«К созданию теории средств высказать свою позицию по спорным 
массовой информации: постановка моментам и обозначить некоторое 
задачи» — так называлась статья, движение вперед, к более широкой 
опубликованная в первом номере постановке вопроса о создании 
журнала «Вопросы теории и практи- обобщающей науки о массмедиа — 
ки журналистики» за 2016 г., точнее, медиалогии, представляющей собой 
даже не статья, а научный доклад, синтез теории средств массовой 
сделанный нами на совместном за- информации как динамической 
седании кафедр журналистики и эко- системы, теории журналистики и до-
номики СМИ, информатики и кибер- полняющей их теории управления 
нетики, математики и эконометрики медиасистемами и медиапроцес-
Байкальского государственного уни- сами.
верситета 26 ноября 2015 г. [1]. В Вот несколько положений, по 
дискуссии, развернувшейся на стра- которым состоялась и / или может 
ницах журнала в 2016 г. и в начале быть продолжена дискуссия.
2017 г., приняли участие наши кол-
леги-экономисты Е. Г. Попкова (Вол- I. Необходимости в создании 
гоград) и А. С. Нацубидзе (Москва), теории СМИ на сегодняшний день 
признанные авторитеты в области нет
теории журналистики профессор Прежде всего потому, пишут 
Санкт-Петербургского государствен- Е. Г. Попкова и А. С. Нацубидзе, что 
ного университета С. Г. Корконо- «концептуальные основы теории 
сенко, профессор Московского го- СМИ заложены многочисленными за-
сударственного университета им. рубежными авторами и в настоящее 
М. В. Ломоносова Л. Г. Свитич, член- время существует необходимость не 
корреспондент Российской акаде- создания, а развития теории СМИ в 
мии образования декан факультета контексте новых явлений современ-
журналистики МГУ Е. Л. Вартанова, ности» [2, с. 526]. Молодой автор 
старший научный сотрудник МГУ Д. В. Дунас еще более категоричен: 
Д. В. Дунас, защитивший диссер- «Теория СМИ была создана в 1983 
тацию на тему «Развитие и совре- г. известным британским теоретиком 
менное состояние теоретических Д. МакКуэйлом.
исследований журналистики и СМИ <…> За тридцать три года не по-
в России». За кулисами дискуссии явилось книги, превзошедшей по 
стоял ее незримый организатор — популярности и признанию теории 
корифей отечественной теории жур- МакКуэйла. На настоящем этапе раз-
налистики профессор Михаил Васи- вития науки о СМИ теоретические 
льевич Шкондин, за что мы выража- положения МакКуэйла не утратили 
ем ему особую признательность. актуальности. А значит, и целесоо-

С позволения участников дис- бразности в их пересмотре нет. <…> 
куссии мы хотим подвести ее итоги, У отечественных исследователей 

276 ISSN 2308-6203



Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. 2017. T. 6. № 3. С. 267–286

нет весомых оснований полагать, что ные прорывные работы в области 
теория МакКуэйла неверна для рос- медиалогии, которые издавались 
сийских реалий. Создание систем- бы не только на русском, но и на 
ной теории заново, искусственно, английском, французском, китай-
специально для России — вряд ли ском и других языках мира. Вот по-
возможно. По крайней мере, такая настоящему амбициозная задача, 
теория едва ли сможет быть жиз- которую должен ставить перед 
неспособной» [3, с. 35]. И дальше: собой подающий надежды молодой 
«Теоретическое знание в области ученый, — самому стать россий-
журналистики и СМИ в условиях со- ским МакКуэйлом! Мы думаем, что 
временного общественного разви- у Дениса Владимировича это полу-
тия и научного прогресса — едино. чится.
Сегодня не может быть две теории 
СМИ — одна для России, другая — II. Теория СМИ и теория журна-
для остального мира» [3, с. 36]. листики находятся в стадии фор-

Да помилуйте, разве кто-то мирования, становления
ставит вопрос таким образом, чтобы Эта реалистическая оценка со-
создать в изоляции от мировой временного состояния медиаиссле-
научной мысли теорию СМИ ис- дований прозвучала в статье чле-
ключительно для России? В этом на-корреспондента РАО Е. Л. Вар-
видится явный перебор автора в тановой «К вопросу об актуализа-
критике нашей концепции. Мы фор- ции теории журналистики и теории 
мулируем задачу иначе: «…обеспе- СМИ» [4]. Теория журналистики, по 
чить приоритет России в одном из мнению автора, «находится сегодня 
самых перспективных и значимых еще на стадии формирования — не 
направлений научных исследова- только в России, но и за рубежом» 
ний» [1, с. 11], а не повторять до [4, с. 6]. «…Российские исследова-
бесконечности зады зарубежных тели дискутируют, спорят, но резуль-
теорий массовой коммуникации. Мы татов — опубликованных словарей, 
говорим о необходимости создания учебников, концептуальных моно-
не просто теории СМИ, а теории графий — пока нет», — утверждает 
средств массовой информации как автор. А что есть?
динамической системы, требую- А есть «Введение в теорию жур-
щей применения математических налистики» [5]. Введение в теорию 
методов, которые позволят прогно- журналистики ‒ очень точное опре-
зировать развитие этой системы и со деление того, что достигнуто на 
знанием дела управлять ею. сегодняшний день медианаукой 

Никто не преуменьшает авто- в России. То же самое имеем на 
ритет Дэниса МакКуэйла и его фун- Западе: «Медиа. Введение: учебник 
даментального труда. Наш журнал, для студентов вузов» [6]. Но введе-
кстати, планирует опубликовать ряд ние в теорию еще не есть завершен-
обзорных статей по книге МакКуэй- ная, систематизированная теория, 
ла «Теории массовой коммуника- как, например, «Экономикс», вклю-
ции», перевод которой до сих пор чающий в себя системно разрабо-
не сделан в России и вряд ли уже танные и структурно взаимосвязан-
появится. Но нам нужны собствен- ные разделы «Микроэкономика», 

ISSN 2308-6203 277



Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2017, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 267–286

«Макроэкономика», «Мировая эко- 2. Медиасистема и в процессе 
номика». своего становления, и в своем раз-

Итак, на сегодняшний день есть витом состоянии есть самая ди-
введение в теорию СМИ и в теорию намичная система, что требует и 
журналистики и процесс теоретиче- чрезвычайно быстрого (оперативно-
ских и эмпирических исследований го) ее теоретического осмысления. 
медиасферы, который, безусловно, Медиатеория (воспользуемся здесь 
идет вперед, рождая такие перво- этим термином) должна успевать за 
классные работы, как монография стремительным развитием медиаси-
Л. Г. Свитич «Феномен журнализ- стемы, но она практически не может 
ма» [7] или комплексное учебное этого сделать, пользуясь старыми, 
пособие «Медиасистема России» в основном умозрительными и эм-
под редакцией Е. Л. Вартановой [8]. пирико-описательными, методами 

Попробуем ответить на вопрос, и приемами. Былая роскошь много-
почему все-таки до сих пор не сло- летних академических исследова-
жились более или менее закончен- ний медиасферы сегодня напрочь 
ные теории СМИ и журналистики. отсутствует.
Отчасти мы пытались ответить на 3. Оперативное познание меди-
него в материале, опубликованном с асистемы как одной из самых высо-
участием А. М. Бычковой в журнале коскоростных динамических систем 
«Вопросы теории и практики журна- невозможно без применения мате-
листики» под названием «Почему матических методов. Только с их 
Сергей Капица не стал академиком помощью можно ускорить процесс 
РАН» [9]. Дополним высказанные в теоретических обобщений, заменяя 
этой статье предположения (версии) миллионы слов и тысячи страниц 
новыми: научных текстов всего лишь не-

1. Только к началу ХХI столетия в сколькими десятками математиче-
мире, и в России в том числе, начала ских формул и уравнений. Мате-
складываться целостная медиаси- матика еще не заходила на поле 
стема на основе единой для всех теории массмедиа, и не заходила 
видов СМИ цифровой технологии. потому, что главным предметом ис-
«Очевидно, что перевод медиасо- следования здесь была не система 
держания в единую и универсаль- СМИ, а журналистика — с ее кон-
ную, а именно в цифровую форму, а тентом, творчеством, свободой. 
также процессы конвергенции техно- Свобода, творчество, контент — и 
логических платформ СМИ и прежде никакой математики, никакой форма- 
разделенных отраслей медиа, ИТ и лизации!
телекоммуникаций, включение ау- Кстати, первым, кто понял, что и 
дитории в процессы производства в теории журналистики не обойтись 
и распространения контекста, — без формализации даже такого инди-
делает вывод Е. Л. Вартанова, — не видуально-творческого продукта, как 
только расширили границы медиаси- журналистский текст, был Евгений 
стемы, но и потребовали ее нового Павлович Прохоров. Именно он уже 
понимания» [8, с. 9] — и систем- в первых изданиях своего знаменито-
ного теоретического отражения, го «Введения в теорию журналисти-
добавим мы. ки» разложил журналистский текст 

278 ISSN 2308-6203



Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. 2017. T. 6. № 3. С. 267–286

(S) c точки зрения его семантически- динамику развития медиаканалов 
информационного наполнения на с помощью системы обыкновенных 
дескриптивную (d), валюативную (v), дифференциальных уравнений, фа-
нормативную (N) и прескриптивную зовыми переменными которой явля-
(p) составляющие. Обозначив текст ются объемы вложений в рекламу. 
как знаковую систему S (d, v, N, p), Обращение к методам нелинейной 
он показал, что различный набор его динамики позволяет наиболее полно 
элементов и их комбинации дают изучить структуру и свойства эволю-
представление не только о реаль- ционных процессов в такой системе, 
ной структуре журналистского текста как средства массовой информа-
и возможностях его восприятия мас- ции» [11, с. 825].
совой аудиторией, но и о творческих А вывод, который делают авторы 
наклонностях самого журналиста «с помощью системы обыкновен-
[10, с. 38‒40]. Математика, подобно ных дифференциальных уравне-
лингвистике, должна стать сестрой ний», выражен словами всего в 
журналистики. одном абзаце текста: «Траектории 

После нашего доклада 26 ноября развития каждого вида СМИ при-
2015 г., в котором мы поставили во мерно одинаковы. Каждый вид, до-
главу угла необходимость математи- стигнув максимума в своем разви-
зации медиаисследований, два пре- тии, начинает постепенно угасать. 
подавателя кафедры математики При этом достижение максимума 
и эконометрики Байкальского уни- происходит достаточно быстро, а 
верситета, ранее не занимавшиеся процесс угасания длится десятиле-
СМИ, менее чем через год подгото- тиями. На сегодняшний день 80 % 
вили и опубликовали потрясающе СМИ являются угасающими… <…> 
интересную статью «Эволюционный …продолжая производить большую 
подход к развитию средств массовой часть информационного продукта 
информации: построение математи- благодаря инерции прошлых лет. 
ческой модели» [11]. В аннотации к Новые виды СМИ обеспечивают не 
ней авторы пишут: «Одна из ключе- только прирост рекламного рынка, 
вых особенностей средств массовой но и его перераспределение, старые 
информации — предоставление ре- каналы — образуют систему, пере-
кламодателям доступа к массовой ходящую с прошлых лет, где фи-
или специализированной аудитории. нансирование постепенно выбыва-
Именно структура рекламного рынка ет» [11, с. 828–829]. Заметим, этот 
отражает динамику происходяще- вывод, важный как в теоретическом, 
го в медиаиндустрии, поскольку за- так и в практическом отношении, без 
висимость стоимости рекламного математических методов невозмож-
времени обусловлена привлека- но было бы сформулировать столь 
тельностью для аудитории того или кратко и ясно, во-первых, и, что 
иного медиаканала. Именно этот очень важно, так быстро, во-вторых. 
факт натолкнул на идею связать из- Убеждены в том, что настоящее 
менения в структуре средств массо- развитие теории СМИ начнется по 
вой информации с изменениями на мере ее математизации. При этом 
рынке рекламы. В исследовании де- мы будем помнить предупреждение 
лается попытка формально описать коллег Е. Г. Попковой и А. С. Нацу-

ISSN 2308-6203 279



Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2017, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 267–286

бидзе о том, что «излишняя матема- «категоричным» при выстраивании 
тизация» вредит здоровью предста- приоритетов в пользу предлагае-
вителей социально-гуманитарного мой нами парадигмы исследований. 
знания» :-) [2, с. 526]. «Приверженцы иных подходов могут 

не согласиться: чем плохи, напри-
III. Что первично: теория СМИ мер, историко-генетический, веро-

или теория журналистики? ятностный, ситуационный, норма-
Раньше вопрос так не ставил- тивный и иные подходы?» — спра-

ся — ни в российской теории (вве- шивает он [12, с. 537‒538]. Ничем 
дении в теорию) журналистики, ни не плохи! Историко-генетический 
в западных теориях массовой ком- подход даже полностью совпада-
муникации. Журналистика и масс- ет с нашим представлением о при-
медиа сливались в единое целое оритетах в очередности разработки 
как содержание массово-инфор- теории СМИ и теории журналистики. 
мационной деятельности и формы Хрестоматийная работа немецкого 
(каналы) распространения массовой историка-экономиста Карла Бюхера 
информации. Е. Л. Вартанова верно «Зачатки периодической печати» 
подмечает, что СМИ потребовали в первую голову была посвящена 
к себе особого внимания в связи с анализу газеты как общественного 
превращением их в сложную меди- учреждения, а не собственно жур-
асистему, в отдельную отрасль эко- налистики [13]. Примечательно и то, 
номики, в своего рода индустрию, что К. Бюхер в 1917 г. создал первый 
что выявило необходимость смо- в Европе Институт газетного дела 
треть на них шире, чем только как на при Лейпцигском университете. 
сферу приложения журналистского А знаменитые «Четыре теории 
труда. Журналистику, считает она, прессы» американских ученых 
уже «нельзя рассматривать только Ф. Сиберта, У. Шрамма и Т. Питерсо-
как самодостаточную деятельность. на, разве не пишут они прямо, что 
Напротив, ее нужно встраивать в своей книге, говоря о прессе, они 
в широкий научный, обществен- подразумевают «все средства мас-
ный и медиаиндустриальный кон- совой информации» [14, с. 15]? То 
текст» [4, с. 8]. есть ничего нового в том, что начи-

В своей статье мы писали, что нать анализ журналистики нужно с 
журналистика как массово-инфор- анализа прессы и — шире — СМИ 
мационная деятельность инсти- как социального института, а затем 
туализируется в системе СМИ и и медиаотрасли и медиасистемы, 
вне функционирования и разви- нет. Ситуационный и вероятност-
тия СМИ не существует. Поэтому, ный подходы, на наш взгляд, на-
чтобы познать журналистику, надо прямую имеют отношение к мате-
разобраться в том, что такое СМИ, матическому моделированию де-
т. е. по логике вещей исследова- ятельности СМИ. О нормативном 
ние системы СМИ должно предше- подходе, который прямо вписыва-
ствовать анализу самой журнали- ется в теорию управления СМИ, мы 
стики [1, с. 8]. скажем ниже. Тогда в чем же причина 

Этот подход показался профес- столь резкого неприятия нашего 
сору С. Г. Корконосенко слишком подхода?

280 ISSN 2308-6203



Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. 2017. T. 6. № 3. С. 267–286

IV. «Системное» управление А если «бессистемно» прислушаться 
СМИ и потоками массовой инфор- к широко распространенному в со-
мации расценивается как огра- временном мире мнению о высшей 
ничение прав и свобод граждан, ценности самопроявления лично-
творческой деятельности журна- сти, в том числе через прессу? <…> 
листов Можно также расценивать журна-

Это один из коренных пунктов листику как явление духовной куль-
дискуссии, по которому нужно объ- туры — национальной и мировой, 
ясниться с уважаемым Сергеем как сферу профессиональной твор-
Григорьевичем Корконосенко. Читая ческой деятельности, как хранили-
его работы, не перестаешь восхи- ще исторической памяти… В этих 
щаться широтой мышления и утон- и иных контекстах вряд ли будет 
ченностью его научной культуры. уместно придавать задаче управле-
По своим убеждениям и жизненной ния первостепенное значение» [12, 
позиции он является классическим с. 538].
представителем либеральной ву- Опасения мэтра российской жур-
зовской интеллигенции. Это наша налистики понятны. Журналистика в 
личная оценка, но она необходи- силу своей специфики остается еще 
ма, чтобы разобраться в существе не до конца забюрократизированной 
спора. При этом слову «либераль- сферой общественной творческой 
ный» мы не придаем никакого нега- деятельности, и ее надо всячески 
тивного оттенка. Быть профессором оберегать от излишнего регламен-
российского университета и не быть тирования и вмешательства извне. 
либералом — нонсенс. Либерализм Однако согласиться с тем, что в 
университетских профессоров — данном контексте «вряд ли будет 
естественная реакция на засилье уместно придавать задаче управле-

ния первостепенное значение», мы 
косного бюрократического аппарата, не можем. Это чистой воды идеа-
неискоренимого, к сожалению, в рос- лизм! 
сийском государстве, но смягчаемо- Да, существуют законы и нефор-
го высокой нравственной позицией мальные институты, регулирующие 
истинных наставников студенческой деятельность СМИ, но существуют 
молодежи, в том числе и прежде и технологии, и капиталы, и другие 
всего выбравшей своей профессией средства, которые позволяют де-
журналистику. Именно журналистам структивным силам использовать 
чаще всего приходится сталкиваться СМИ для того, чтобы манипулиро-
с фактами чиновничьего произво- вать общественным сознанием, де-
ла и бороться с ним. И неслучайно зинформировать население, подры-
поэтому, что особую насторожен- вать общественную и государствен-
ность в отношении предлагаемой ную безопасность. И если не знать 
нами концепции у С. Г. Корконосенко механизмов управления системой 
вызвала ее нацеленность на задачи СМИ, не иметь представления о 
управления системой СМИ. том, кто и как может их использовать 

«…Возникают сомнения, — и для каких целей, т. е. не владеть 
пишет он, — насчет управления си- теорией управления СМИ, то что мы 
стемой СМИ как приоритетной цели. будем иметь? Профессор уделяет 

ISSN 2308-6203 281



Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2017, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 267–286

большое внимание необходимости и и национальных особенностей ме-
важности использования норматив- диасистем Америки и России, не по-
ных теорий журналистики, закрепля- зволяющих говорить об их полной 
ющих ценностные эталонные нормы тождественности.
поведения журналистов и других ра- В социальных науках, к которым 
ботников СМИ [15, с. 60–81], но это относится и наука о СМИ и журнали-
лишний раз доказывает, что управ- стике, национальная специфика в 
ленческий подход к теории СМИ ор- терминологии в той или иной степени 
ганично дополняется нормативным, присутствовать будет всегда, 
вбирает его в систему науки о медиа. поэтому стесняться использовать, 

И последнее, на чем мы хотели а тем более игнорировать термины 
бы остановиться, заканчивая поле- отечественного происхождения вряд 
мику с уважаемым профессором. У ли оправданно. Другое дело, как 
нас нет никаких претензий на «моно- правильно отмечает Л. Г. Свитич, 
польное положение» предлагаемого что в условиях международного на-
проекта теории средств массовой учного общения неизбежно возника-
информации [12, с. 540]. Наука тем ет вопрос: «Как терминологически и 
и отличается от роты солдат, шага- понятийно вписаться в глобальный 
ющих в ногу с поручиком, что в ней научный тезаурус, не поступаясь при 
никто не идет строем: всегда кто-то этом отечественными традициями и 
резко вырывается вперед, кто-то, цивилизованной ментальностью?» 
наоборот, плетется сзади, кто-то [16, с. 549‒550].
бредет на ощупь, а кто-то вообще Какую же специфику отражают 
уходит в другую сторону. И конечно, русскоязычный термин «средства 
в ней нет поручика, заставляющего массовой информации» и англоя-
всех идти в ногу с собой. зычный «массмедиа»? В трехслов-

ной русской аббревиатуре «СМИ» 
V. О терминах «СМИ» и «масс- на первом месте стоит слово «сред-

медиа». ства». Средства чего? — массовой 
Прежде всего бросается в глаза информации. Ответ кажется оче-

стыдливая ирония некоторых участ- видным. Но средства чьи? исполь-
ников дискуссии по поводу термина зуемые кем? с какой целью? В со-
«СМИ», доставшегося от советской ветской традиции: средства в руках 
эпохи: сначала «СМИП» (сред- государства и коммунистической 
ства массовой информации и про- партии, используемые с целью воз-
паганды), потом «СМИ» [3, с. 33; действия на общественное созна-
12, с. 538]. На Западе использует- ние и формирования общественного 
ся термин «массмедиа» (чаще — мнения, пропаганды и агитации, т. е. 
просто «медиа»), на котором зиж- как инструмент управления обще-
дется теория массовых коммуника- ством. В постсоветской российской 
ций. Вот его-то и надо употреблять традиции на первом этапе СМИ 
как более совершенный аналог рос- выступают как инструмент в руках 
сийского термина «СМИ». олигархических группировок, обе-

Между тем каждый из этих тер- спечивающий им высокую конкурен-
минов имеет право на существова- тоспособность в борьбе за влияние 
ние и несет отпечаток исторических на государство. Затем (после гибели 

282 ISSN 2308-6203



Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. 2017. T. 6. № 3. С. 267–286

атомной подлодки «Курск» в августе для управления процессами комму-
2000 г. и массированной информа- никации. Так было с момента зарож-
ционной атаки зарвавшихся оли- дения прессы в Северной Америке 
гархов на президента В. В. Путина) (конец XVII ‒ начало ХVIII в.) до се-
начался процесс перехода ведущих редины ХХ в., когда американская 
медиаканалов под государственный общественность с ужасом обнару-
контроль. Как считает В. Д. Соловей, жила, что свободные массмедиа из 
этот процесс привел к формиро- (всего лишь) посредника в социаль-
ванию в России медиаполитиче- ных коммуникациях превратились 
ской системы — симбиоза власти и в инструмент, в средство, использу-
медиа. «Основные принципы этой емое в интересах узких групп лиц, 
системы: власть определяет общую монопольно владеющих ими. 
политическую линию СМИ, СМИ Сегодня, когда весь западный 
лояльны власти и выступают одной мир столкнулся с чудовищным явле-
из ее главных опор, власть не вме- нием массовой «фейкизации» жур-
шивается в бизнес СМИ» [17, с. 31]. налистики, аббревиатура даже не 

Если перевести слова «средства СМИ, а СМИП больше всего подходит 
массовой информации» букваль- для массмедиа Америки и Европы. С 
но (каждое слово отдельно) на ан- учетом указанных нюансов и стоит, 
глийский язык, то это будет звучать на наш взгляд, употреблять термины 
как mass information media, однако «массмедиа» и «СМИ», которые 
такое словосочетание в английском действительно стали очень близки и 
языке не употребляется, а использу- движутся к идентичности. Дискуссия 
ется сочетание mass communication о терминологии и понятийном аппа-
media, но это не совсем то же, что рате теории массмедиа показывает, 
СМИ. Американские массмедиа насколько актуальным и необходи-
исторически возникли как частные мым является участие в ней пред-
бизнес-учреждения, которые выпол- ставителей лингвистики. Не зря же 
няли роль посредника в процессах сказал один умный человек: лингви-
массовой коммуникации, продавая стика есть родная сестра журнали-
необходимую информацию массам стики. 
съезжавшихся в страну мигрантов. В 
термине «массмедиа», следователь- VI. Как назвать науку о масс-
но, изначально был заложен иной медиа.
смысл, отличный от прямолинейно- Одним словом: медиалогия. 
сти термина «средства (орудие, ин- Суть ее, может быть, как раз и вы-
струмент) массовой информации». ражена загадочной фразой вели-

Е. Л. Вартанова приводит знаме- кого канадца «The medium is the 
нитую фразу Г. М. Маклюэна: «The message», которую можно пере-
medium is the message», которую на вести и так: средство информации 
русский язык переводят по-разному. само есть содержание (содержит в 
Один из переводов звучит так: «По- себе журналистику как оперативно-
средник и есть сообщение» [8, с. 7]. деятельностный процесс). Меди-
Сообщение (информация) как по- алогия, в нашем понимании, есть 
средник в процессах коммуникации, синтез теории СМИ и теории журна-
но никак не средство, используемое листики, возвышающий над собой 

ISSN 2308-6203 283



Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2017, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 267–286

теорию управления массмедиа. В Но мы называем ее наукой будуще-
конечном счете медиалогия имеет го и в приземленном смысле, ибо в 
своей задачей обеспечение здоро- настоящее время можно говорить 
вого образа жизни человечества в только о процессе становления этой 
системе глобальных социальных науки. Она не результировалась еще 
коммуникаций. А эту задачу невоз- ни в четко оформленную отрасль на-
можно решить без научной теории учного знания, ни в солидные учеб-
управления системой СМИ, без под- ники, представляющие системати-
готовки на ее основе новых кадров зацию этого знания. Однако процесс 
по-настоящему честной, правдивой создания науки о массмедиа, как 
и гуманной журналистики. отмечалось выше, будет развивать-

По своей социальной значи- ся стремительно, и мы не должны 
мости медиалогия выдвигается в отстать от других стран. У россий-
разряд самых перспективных и вос- ской научной школы СМИ и журнали-
требованных научных направлений стики есть достаточный потенциал, 
во всем мире. Поэтому мы называ- чтобы лидировать в этом процессе и 
ем медиалогию наукой будущего в ускорять его, проводя комплексные 
самом высоком смысле этого слова. междисциплинарные исследования.

REFERENCES
1. Sukhodolov A. P., Rachkov M. P. To create a theory of the media: statement of the 

problem. Voprosy teorii i praktiki zhurnalistiki = Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 
2016, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 6–13. DOI: 10.17150/2308-6203.2016.5(1).6-13. (In Russian). 

2. Popkova E. G., Natsubidze A. S. Evolution and the new outlines of the theory of 
mass media in the XXI century (reflections on the article of prof. A. P. Sukhodolov and prof. 
M. P. Rachkov «To create a theory of the media: statement of the problem»). Voprosy teorii i 
praktiki zhurnalistiki = Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2016, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 
521–528. DOI: 10.17150/2308-6203.2016.5(3).521-528. (In Russian). 

3. Dunas D. V. On the question of the feasibility of media theory formulation at present 
time. Voprosy teorii i praktiki zhurnalistiki = Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 
2017, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 30–40. DOI: 10.17150/2308-6203.2017.6(1).30-40. (In Russian). 

4. Vartanova E. L. On the problem of updating the theory of journalism and the theory 
of the mass media. Voprosy teorii i praktiki zhurnalistiki = Theoretical and Practical Issues 
of Journalism, 2017, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 5–13. DOI: 10.17150/2308-6203.2017.6(1).5-13. (In 
Russian). 

5. Prokhorov E. P. Vvedenie v teoriyu zhurnalistiki [Introduction to the Theory of Journal-
ism]. 8th ed. Moscow, Aspekt Press, 2011. 351 p. 

6. Briggs A., Kobley P. (eds). The Media: An Introduction. 2nd ed. London, Longman, 
2002. 592 p. (Russ. ed.: Briggs A., Kobley P. (eds). Media. Vvedenie [Media. Introduction]. 
2nd ed. Moscow, Yuniti-Dana Publ., 2012. 550 p.). 

7. Svitich L. G. Fenomen zhurnalizma [The Phenomenon of Journalism]. Moscow State 
University Publ., 2000. 252 p. 

8. Vartanova E. L. (ed.). Mediasistema Rossii [Media System of Russia]. Moscow, Aspekt 
Press, 2015. 384 p. 

9. Bychkova A. M., Rachkov M. P., Sukhodolov A. P. Why Sergey Kapitsa didn’t become 
the academician of the Russian academy of sciences. Voprosy teorii i praktiki zhurnalistiki = 
Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2013, no. 1, pp. 215–218. (In Russian).

10. Prokhorov E. P. Vvedenie v teoriyu zhurnalistiki [Introduction to the Theory of Journal-
ism]. 2nd ed. Moscow, RIP-Kholding Publ., 1998. 310 p. 

11. Baenkhaeva A. V., Timofeev S. V. The evolutionary approach to development of mass 
media: construction of a mathematical model. Izvestiya Baykal’skogo gosudarstvennogo 

284 ISSN 2308-6203



Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. 2017. T. 6. № 3. С. 267–286

universiteta = Bulletin of Baikal State University, 2016, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 825–833. DOI: 
10.17150/2500-2759.2016.26(5).825-833 (In Russian). 

12. Korkonosenko S. G. Journalism theory: from schematics to realism. Voprosy teorii i 
praktiki zhurnalistiki = Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2016, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 
536–545. DOI: 10.17150/2308-6203.2016.5(4).536-545. (In Russian). 

13. Byukher K. Vozniknovenie narodnogo khozyaistva [The Rise of the National Economy. 
Public Lectures and Essays]. Petrograd, Academia Publ., 1923. Vol. 1. 241 p.

14. Sieber F., Peterson T., Schramm W. Four Theories of the Press: The Authoritarian, Lib-
ertarian, Social Responsibility, and Soviet Communist Concepts of what the Press Should be 
and Do. University of Illinois Press, 1956. 153 p. (Russ. ed.: Sieber F., Peterson T., Schramm 
W. Chetyre teorii pressy. Moscow, National Press Institute Publ., Vagrius Publ., 1998. 224 p.). 

15. Korkonosenko S. G. (ed.). Teorii zhurnalistiki v Rossii: zarozhdenie i razvitie [Theo-
ries of Journalism in Russia: The Origin and Development]. Saint Petersburg State University 
Publ., 2014. 272 p. 

16. Svitich L. G. Studying journalism in the context of interdisciplinary paradigms. 
Voprosy teorii i praktiki zhurnalistiki = Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2016, 
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 546–561. DOI: 10.17150/2308-6203.2016.5(4).546-561. (In Russian). 

17. Solovei V. D. Absolyutnoe oruzhie. Osnovy psikhologicheskoi voiny i mediama-
nipulirovaniya [An Absolute Weapon. Basics of Psychological War and Media Manipulation]. 
Moscow, Eksmo Publ., 2015. 320 p.

СПИСОК ИСПОЛЬЗОВАННОЙ ЛИТЕРАТУРЫ
1. Суходолов А. П. К созданию теории средств массовой информации: постановка 

задачи / А. П. Суходолов, М. П. Рачков // Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. — 
2016. — Т. 5, № 1. — С. 6–13. — DOI: 10.17150/2308-6203.2016.5(1).6-13.

2. Попкова Е. Г. Эволюция и новые очертания теории средств массовой информа-
ции в XXI веке (размышления над статьей А. П. Суходолова и М. П. Рачкова «К соз-
данию теории средств массовой информации: постановка задачи») / Е. Г. Попкова, 
А. С. Нацубидзе // Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. — 2016. — Т. 5, № 3. — 
С. 521–528. — DOI: 10.17150/2308-6203.2016.5(3).521-528.

3. Дунас Д. В. О целесообразности создания теории СМИ на современном этапе / Д. 
В. Дунас // Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. — 2017. — Т. 6, № 1. — С. 30–40. — 
DOI: 10.17150/2308-6203.2017.6(1).30-40.

4. Вартанова Е. Л. К вопросу об актуализации теории журналистики и теории СМИ / 
Е. Л. Вартанова // Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. — 2017. — Т. 6, № 1. — 
С. 5–13. — DOI:10.17150/2308-6203.2017.6(1).5-13.

5. Прохоров Е. П. Введение в теорию журналистики : учебник / Е. П. Прохоров. — 8-е 
изд., испр. — М. : Аспект Пресс, 2011. — 351 с.

6. Медиа. Введение : учебник / под ред. А. Бриггза, П. Кобли. — 2-е изд. — М. : Юни-
ти-Дана, 2012. — 550 с.

7. Cвитич Л. Г. Феномен журнализма / Л. Г. Свитич. — М. : Икар, 2000. — 252 с. 
8. Медиасистема России : учеб. пособие / под ред. Е. Л. Вартановой. — М. : Аспект 

Пресс, 2015. — 384 с.
9. Бычкова А. М. Почему Сергей Капица не стал академиком РАН / А. М. Бычкова, 

М. П. Рачков, А. П. Суходолов // Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. — 2013. — 
№ 1. — С. 215–218.

10. Прохоров Е. П. Введение в теорию журналистики : учеб. пособие / Е. П. Прохо-
ров. — Изд. 2-е, испр. и доп. — М. : РИП-Холдинг, 1998. — 310 с. 

11. Баенхаева А. В. Эволюционный подход к развитию средств массовой информа-
ции: построение математической модели / А. В. Баенхаева, С. В. Тимофеев // Известия 
Байкальского государственного университета. — 2016. — Т. 26, № 5. — С. 825–833. — 
DOI: 10.17150/2500-2759.2016.26(5).825-833.

12. Корконосенко С. Г. Теория журналистики: от схематизма к реализму / С. Г. Кор-
коносенко // Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. — 2016. — Т. 5, № 4. — С. 536–
545. — DOI: 10.17150/2308-6203.2016.5(4).536-545.

ISSN 2308-6203 285



Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2017, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 267–286

13. Бюхер К. Возникновение народного хозяйства. Публичные лекции и очерки : в 
2 т. / К. Бюхер. — Петроград : Academia, 1923. — Т. 1. — 241 c. 

14. Сиберт Ф. Четыре теории прессы / Ф. Сиберт, У. Шрамм, Т. Питерсон. — М. : Нац. 
ин-т прессы : Вагриус. — 1998. — 224 c.

15. Теории журналистики в России: зарождение и развитие / под ред. С. Г. Корконо-
сенко. — СПб. : Изд-во С.-Петерб. ун-та, 2014. — 272 c.

16. Свитич Л. Г. Изучение журналистики в контексте общенаучных парадигм / 
Л. Г. Свитич // Вопросы теории и практики журналистики. — 2016. — Т. 5, № 4. — С. 546–
561. — DOI: 10.17150/2308-6203.2016.5(4).546-561.

17. Соловей В. Д. Абсолютное оружие. Основы психологической войны и медиама-
нипулирования / В. Д. Соловей. — М. : Эксмо, 2015. — 320 с.

REFERENCE TO ARTICLE
Sukhodolov A. P., Rachkov M. P. Mediology as a Science of the Future ((an invitation 

to continue the discussion started in this journal in 2016)). Voprosy teorii i praktiki zhurnalis-
tiki = Theoretical and Practical Issues of Journalism, 2017, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 267–286. DOI: 
10.17150/2308-6203.2017.6(3).267-286.

БИБЛИОГРАФИЧЕСКОЕ ОПИСАНИЕ СТАТЬИ
Cуходолов А. П. Медиалогия — наука будущего (приглашение к продолжению 

дискуссии, начатой журналом в 2016 г.) / А. П. Суходолов, М. П. Рачков // Вопросы теории 
и практики журналистики. — 2017. — Т. 6, № 3. — С. 267–286. — DOI: 10.17150/2308-
6203.2017.6(3).267-286.

286 ISSN 2308-6203