Russian Journal of Linguistics  2021 Vol. 25 No. 3  586–610 

 ISSN 2687-0088 (print), ISSN 2686-8024 (online) http://journals.rudn.ru/linguistics

 

 
 
 

DOI: https://doi.org/10.22363/2687‐0088‐2021‐25‐3‐586‐610 
Introductory article 

	
Emotionalisation	of	contemporary	media	discourse:		

A	research	agenda	
 

Franco ZAPPETTINI1, Douglas M. PONTON2, 3 and Tatiana V. LARINA3 
 

1University of Liverpool  
Liverpool, UK 

2Catania University 
Catania, Italy 

3Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia (RUDN University) 
Moscow, Russia 

 
Abstract 
This special issue continues the discussion of the role of emotion in discourse (see Russian Journal 
of Linguistics 2015 (1) and 2018, 22 (1)) which, as testified by the burgeoning body of literature in 
the field, has become more prominent in different spheres and contexts of public life. This time we 
focus on emotionalisation of media discourse. We highlight the intensification of emotions in media 
and, showcasing contributions from international authors, critically reflect on constructions, 
functions and pragmatic purposes of emotions in media discourse. Our aim is to investigate emotions 
in the media from semiotic, pragmatic and discursive perspectives against the contemporary socio-
political background in which traditional notions concerning the role of media are being noticeably 
changed. In this introductory article, we also put forward an agenda for further research by briefly 
outlining three main areas of exploration: the logics of media production and reception, the 
boundaries of media discourse, and the semiotic resources deployed to construct emotionality. We 
then present the articles in this issue and highlight their contributions to the study of linguistic 
representations of emotions. We then summarise the main results and suggest a brief avenue for 
further research.  
Keywords: emotions, emotionalisation, media discourse, persuasion, media linguistics, Critical 
Discourse Analysis, Multimodal Analysis 

 
For citation: 
Zappettini, Franco, Douglas M. Ponton & Tatiana V. Larina. 2021. Emotionalisation of 
contemporary media discourse: A research agenda. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3).  
586–610. https://doi.org/10.22363/2687-0088-2021-25-3-586-610 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

586 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

Вступительная статья 
 

Эмоционализация	современного	медиадискурса:		
исследовательская	повестка	дня	

 

Ф. ЗАППЕТТИНИ1, Д.М. ПОНТОН2, 3, Т.В. ЛАРИНА3 
 

1Ливерпульский университет 
Ливерпуль, Великобритания 
2Катанийский университет 

Катания, Италия 
3Российский университет дружбы народов (РУДН) 

Москва, Россия 
 

Аннотация 
В этом специальном выпуске продолжается обсуждение роли эмоций в дискурсе (см. Russian 
Journal of Linguistics 2015, № 1 и 2018, вып. 22, №1), которая, как свидетельствует растущий 
объем литературы в этой области, стала более заметной в разных сферах и контекстах обще-
ственной жизни. На этот раз мы обращаемся к эмоционализации медиадискурса. Авторы  
статей данного выпуска анализируют способы выражения эмоций, их функции и прагмати-
ческие цели в медийном дискурсе и приводят многочисленные факты, свидетельствующие 
об усилении эмоционализации в средствах массовой информации. Наша цель – исследовать 
эмоции в СМИ с семиотической, прагматической и дискурсивной точек зрения на фоне  
современного социально-политического контекста, в котором традиционные представления 
о роли средств массовой информации претерпевают заметные изменения. Мы также наме-
чаем направления дальнейших исследований, выделяя три основные области, касающиеся  
(1) логики производства и восприятия медиапродукта, (2) границ медиадискурса, (3) семио-
тических ресурсов, используемых для создания эмоциональности. Далее в статье мы кратко 
представляем исследования авторов этого выпуска и отмечаем их вклад в изучение лингви-
стических репрезентаций эмоций. В заключении подводим основные итоги и предлагаем 
пути дальнейших исследований. 
Ключевые слова: эмоции, эмоционализация, убеждение, медиадискурс, медиалингвистика, 
критический дискурс-анализ, мультимодальный анализ 
 
Для цитирования: 
Zappettini F., Ponton D.M., Larina T.V. Emotionalisation of contemporary media discourse:  
A research agenda. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2021. Vol. 25. № 3. P. 586–610. 
https://doi.org/10.22363/2687-0088-2021-25-3-586-610 

 
1. Introduction 

Emotions are at the basis of human interaction and communication and, as 
testified by numerous studies in the field of psychology, sociology and linguistics, 
their role has been noticeably increasing in recent years (e.g. Alba-Juez & Larina 
2018, Lerner & Rivkin-Fish 2021, Mackenzie & Alba-Juez, 2019, Scherer 2005, 
Shakhovsky 2008, 2018, Wetherell 2012, 2015, Wirth & Schramm 2015). This 
body of research has highlighted “the pervasive presence of emotionality in 
contemporary culture, where emotions become more important and formative than 
anything else” (Lerner & Rivkin-Fish 2021: 1), while it has shown how both 
explicit emotional expressions and implicit means of emotional appeal have 
broadened their functions in different social domains and discourses. The term 
emotionalisation has thus been used to refer to the legitimization and intensification 

587 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

of emotional discourse in collective spheres of life (Ahmed 2014, Holmes 2010, 
Lerner & Rivkin-Fish 2021, Sieben & Wettergren 2010, Woodward 2009). As well 
as in everyday interpersonal interaction, emotionalisation of institutional, 
professional and civic domains has been identified (Lerner & Rivkin-Fish 2021). 
Emotions are highly relevant in academic discourse (e.g. Gretzky & Lerner 2021, 
Larina & Ponton 2020, forthcoming; Lerner, Zbenovich & Kaneh-Shalit 2021),  
in classroom settings (e.g. El-Dakhs et al. 2019), in digital communication (e.g. 
Maíz-Arévalo 2018, Jus 2018). Appeals to emotions have increasingly been 
featured in what are otherwise regarded as non-emotional genres of discourses, for 
example diplomatic, economic and financial discourses (e.g. Belyakov 2015, 
Mackenzie 2018, Zappettini & Unerman 2016). Several scholars have also pointed 
out that it is extremely challenging to disentangle affect from ideology, since the 
feelings and ideas that trigger the emotions are closely bound up together 
(Wetherell 2012, 2015). As Breeze (2020: 22) notes, emotions are therefore an 
inherent component of political discourse too, “precisely because of [their] 
emotional/affective impact on target audiences” (see also Breeze 2019). 
Emotionalisation has also been pervasive in the media (e.g. Alba-Juez & Mackenzie 
2019, Altheide 2002, 2006, Antipova et al. 2021, de Marlangeon 2018, Bartlett & 
Gentile 2011, Döveling et al. 2011, Furedi 2018, Kopytowska & Chilton 2018, 
Schwab & Schwender 2011, Vishnyakova & Polyakova 2017) where emotions can 
be used as a fundamental means of persuasion, since they are essential in 
understanding how media messages are processed, and have considerable impact on 
individual behaviour and public social life (Döveling, von Scheve & Konijn 2011).  

Our special issue focuses on the above-mentioned dynamics as they are 
constructed by and reflected in the media. Our aim is thus to investigate emotions 
in the media from semiotic, pragmatic and discursive perspectives, against the 
contemporary socio-political background in which traditional notions concerning 
the role of media, its ownership and professional practices, are being revolutionized 
by new technologies which allow, for example, for more interactive forms of 
communication performed through social media (Assimakopoulos 2018, Bou-
Franch & Garcés-Conejos Blitvich 2019, Breeze 2020). On the back of these 
changes, we see the emergence of new participatory opportunities (for example 
citizens’ journalism), which has the potential to democratise the informative 
function that has typically distinguished traditional forms of media. New media 
platforms, meanwhile, pose new challenges to how information is produced, 
distributed and consumed, as distinctions between public and private mediated 
spaces have increasingly blurred. These issues have implications for discursive 
affordances in all realms of social life including political debate, and the infinite 
variety of social themes with which it is concerned.  

 
2. Emotionalisation of media discourse: Areas of exploration 

In a changed media landscape, we thus need to interrogate language and 
society along lines of enquiry that reflect the key themes outlined so far. Our special 
issue does this through the lens of emotionalisation, and from a critical perspective. 

588 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

Our exploration of the ways in which language framing may intersect with the 
emotionalisation of media discourse is guided by what we see as key questions that 
need addressing in particular around the whats, whys, and hows of media discourse. 
We would therefore like to put forward a media and emotions research agenda in 
relation to three key areas of exploration in which the whats, whys and hows of 
media discourse interplay significantly with each other. 

The first area of exploration is concerned with the logics of media production 
and reception. Information and entertainment goals, along with social, political and 
commercial agendas, have always driven media production. While emotions have 
often been mobilised by the media to achieve those goals (for example by 
sensationalizing a piece of news to make it newsworthy, or to support one particular 
editorial line), one key question is how the media is now performing these functions 
in an ever-shifting social landscape. For example, how is the press performing its 
persuasive function in relation to, for instance, new multimodal and digital forms 
of communication? Crucially, moreover, for whose benefit or what political gain is 
this being done? Researching the emotionalisation of media discourse should 
therefore help us understand not only what discourses are produced by the media 
but also why they are circulated. 

The role of the media in creating and swaying public opinion can hardly be 
overstated. Constructing and appealing to emotions must therefore largely be seen 
as instrumental to media persuasive strategies. For example, the question of ‘moral 
panic’, as fuelled and amplified by the media has been widely debated since the 
Sixties (Cohen 2011) and has now re-emerged around new discursive foci such as 
the politicization of the ‘immigration debate’, which has centered around emotional 
responses of fear and resentment (Kopytowska & Chilton 2018, Wodak 2015, 
Zappettini 2019, 2021). In this sense, the newsworthiness of media coverage should 
primarily be seen as lying in specific communicative agendas that ultimately 
respond to basic social anxieties (Delanty 2008) and fears of having ‘strangers at 
our door’ (Bauman 2016). If “the prevalence of fear in public discourse can 
contribute to stances and reactive social policies that promote state control and 
surveillance” (Altheide & Michalowski 1999: 476), then we should also explain 
how the media mobilisation of fear-mongering, and other emotions, can also serve 
the legitimation of various political projects or commercial imperatives (see Cap 
2017, Kopytowska & Chilton 2018, Sedláková & Kopytowska 2018, Doudaki & 
Boubouka 2019, Koschut 2020, Ozyumenko & Larina, this issue, Trajkova 2020).  

Within this first area of exploration, we believe that the emotions play a crucial 
role, not only in how and why media discourses are produced but also in how and 
why they are received and consumed by their audiences. Although much research 
has shown how frequent exposure to certain media narratives can sediment into a 
‘cumulative effect’ (Bell 1996) that would explain some readerships’ attitudes, the 
direction of causality (who influences whom) between media and audience is not 
linear, and the ‘media effect’ (Wirth & Schramm 2005) is better to be assumed as 
mutually constitutive (that is, the media reinforces certain views already formed 

589 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

among their audiences, who in turn select media aligned with their views). We 
would thus need to consider different potential discursive sites of production and 
consumption (van Dijk 1988) in which media emotionalisation is taking place. 

The second area of exploration delves into the boundaries of media discourse. 
Here we would like to draw attention to at least two significantly interrelated trends. 
One trend is that, arguably, the tones of mediatized socio-political debates are 
shifting away from logos towards pathos or indeed towards the realm of irrealis 
statements. In other words, from reasoned debate about the issues of the day to a 
more direct appeal, based often on various forms of emotionality or constructs 
which are no longer connected with any truth-based logics, the so-called ‘fake 
news’ which is so pervasive in a post-truth society (D’Ancona 2017). However, 
even rejecting the claim for a diminished reliance on logos, Haidt’s (2001) social 
intuition model tells us that moral reasoning is only subsequent to moral intuition 
(that is, a ‘gut feeling’ evaluation based on basic emotions), thus underlining the 
importance of pathos-oriented discourses. Emblematic of these processes are social 
media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter, which have enabled interaction by 
“shift[ing] the boundaries between private and public domains; [by] combin[ing] 
reflections of individual interiority with the process of making sense of social 
relations and the constitution of collective identity” (Lerner & Rivkin-Fish 2021: 
6). Social media such as Facebook and Twitter are to be seen not simply as 
platforms but rather as social and political actors/institutions in their own right, as 
they have the power to gatekeep and polarise debates and to control our interaction 
via algorithms which ultimately are based on our emotions. This raises questions 
around discursive opportunities and affordances, and more generally the 
institutionalization of social reality (Berger & Luckman 1966). 

Arguably, the appeal of recent US presidents such as Barack Obama and, to an 
even greater extent, Donald Trump, depended in no small measure to the way in 
which their emotional appeal, transmitted via the affordances of emergent 
technology, resonated with receivers in the intimacy of their relations with the new 
media platforms. With Trump, in particular, a new phenomenon was witnessed, in 
which the emotional responses of a political leader were directly transmitted to 
subjects – in a literal sense, followers – allowing for the bypassing of all the 
previously known filters that have always characterised traditional media. This 
phenomenon, which also highlights pathos over logos, was not limited to Trump, 
but has become a feature of political discourse more generally. Other social media 
platforms such as Youtube or Facebook have effected similar alterations, enabling 
for more direct engagement between the parties involved in the political process, 
and at the same time permitting the expression and exchange of emotive talk, which 
readily slips towards the high intensity end of the spectrum. Insults, critiques, 
dismissals, ad hominem attacks, rants, diatribes and feuds are more frequently 
encountered than their opposites – hyperbolic admiration, emoji-fuelled 
expressions of adoration or love, exaggerated praise or abbreviations signalling 
degrees of amusement (lol, lmao, etc.) – though the latter also feature. As Bassols, 

590 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

Cros & Torrent (2013) suggest, both positive and negative emotions have the effect 
of capturing and holding the interest.  

A second trend, namely the heightened emotionalization of media language 
regulation, also needs consideration. Ideologies and interests have been able to 
harness the power of new media such as social networks, for better or for worse. 
Such media affordances have the potential to appropriate the internet as a 
propaganda tool and, in some cases to promote hate speech, seemingly shifting the 
threshold of what is now sayable and accepted in the public sphere (Wodak 2019). 
In response, we are seeing increasing debates around issues of political correctness 
in language produced or allowed by the media (Assimakopoulos et al. 2018). The 
extent to which ‘verbal hygiene’ (Cameron 2012) should be applied (if at all) is not 
something that we can cover in the space of this article, however, as it involves the 
larger question of prescriptivism, but would be worth further investigation. 

The third area of exploration covers the semiotic resources which have been 
deployed by the media, and their associated pragmatic implications. As linguists, 
semioticians and social scientists we need to adapt our investigation of “affective-
discursive practices” (Wetherell et al. 2015: 57) and strategies to the changing 
media landscape by focusing both on verbal means of construing emotionality 
through lexico-grammatical resources such as metaphor, simile and other rhetorical 
devices (Emanatian 1995, Handa 2013) and non-verbal means (font size, large text 
in headings, use of colour, pictures, etc.) recognizing thus the importance of 
multimodality in realising discourses (e.g. Dancygier & Vandelanotte 2017, Ponton 
2016). Arguably, the multimodal construction of meaning in the ‘image-texts’ 
(Mitchell 1986) encountered in memes (Denisova 2019, Mina 2019, Jus 2019), 
above all privileges the emotional dimension of communication. Indeed, through 
the symbolic language of emoticons it is possible for skilled users to communicate 
a range of emotional responses to posted content, and thus an interactive dimension 
is constructed that both permits and encourages the underlining of the emotional 
component. Though in its early stages, Multimodal theory (Kress & Van Leeuwen 
2010, Bateman et al. 2017, etc.) represents an invaluable contribution to the 
theoretical and practical approaches favoured in Discourse Analysis generally 
(Alba-Juez 2009, Ponton & Larina 2016, 2017), since it aims at explicating 
meanings in the prevalent semiotic practices of the computer age. These frequently 
depend on the emergent codes, widely shared among the proficient, mainly young 
users of the new generations, inherent in colour, number and other forms of 
contemporary symbolism (Faliang et al. 2017). Finally, it is important to remember 
that any ‘sign’ (whether it be text or image), makes sense within a communicative 
context that must be shared by the producer and receiver of any message. As some 
of the contributions in this issue implicitly demonstrate (e.g. Musolff, Solopova & 
Kushneruk, Zappettini) the semiotic resources tapped into by the media analysed in 
their studies are predicated on specific cultural repertoires that the analyst must 
interpret from an emic perspective.  

 

591 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

3. Outline of contributions to the issue 
The contributions to this issue address some of the key issues outlined above 

and they do so from a variety of methodological approaches and with different 
analytical foci.  

Bull and Waddle’s contribution focuses on emotionality in audience responses 
to (televised) political speeches. Building on and extending Atkinson’s work on 
interactive behaviour between speaker/audience, Bull and Waddle explore in detail 
dynamics of invited and uninvited audience responses (e.g. applause and booing) 
in a variety of national contexts. This study illuminates the subtle interplay between 
rhetorical techniques used by politicians to invite responses which, as claimed by 
the authors, may be seen to reflect differing degrees of audience emotionality. The 
significance of Bull and Waddle’s paper is not simply based on propositional 
content but also largely depends on affective and emotional elements. The authors’ 
analysis can thus be extended further to corroborate our understanding of political 
communication.  

Our issue also features three papers that deal with emotionalization of media 
discourse in the debates and unfolding of events relating to Brexit. Musolff analyses 
a corpus of politicians’ speeches and interviews and press texts in relation to the 
proverb ‘You cannot have your cake and eat it’ to argue that the hyperbolic use of 
such proverb was instrumental in driving highly emotional discourses associated 
with metaphorical scenarios of liberation (in the specific instantiation, the UK 
liberating itself from the EU’s yoke). Musolff goes further, suggesting that the 
escalation of the cake metaphor – upon which many Leave and Remain arguments 
rested – “led to a polarisation and radicalisation of political discourse in Britain”. 

Similar views are put forward by Zappettini who, focusing on the language of 
the British tabloid press, shows how emotionally laden representations of Britain 
and the EU as victim and bully respectively drove many public discourses during 
the negotiation stages of Brexit. Zappettini also critically points to how the 
emotional language of the tabloid press has been instrumental in shaping public 
opinion on the UK/EU relationships not only in the context of Brexit but also in the 
larger historical coverage of Euro-news as it effectively managed to drive the Brexit 
agenda along ‘pathos over logos’ lines. Crucially, such emotional framing of Brexit 
also became the dominant discourse of the Leave campaign and gained traction vis-
a-vis the Remain arguments which were primarily perceived as based on ‘cold 
facts’ (Zappettini 2019). 

Dancygier’s contribution also focuses on discourses of Brexit during the 
negotiation stage, looking in particular at emotional responses to narrativized 
similes (‘Brexit is/feels like…’). However, rather than focusing on how emotions 
are construed in/by the media, Dancygier’s analysis is concerned with how different 
similes, or ‘patterns of figuration’ can signal different stances. Dancygier gives us 
a detailed account of how similes were used by speakers/writers to communicate 
their different emotional stances on specific aspects of Brexit with a focus on how 
ordinary citizens conceptualized Brexit and how they responded to its delivery. 

592 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

Like Zappettini and Musolff, Dancygier demonstrates the relationships between 
linguistic forms and the emotional responses they are meant to convey, reasserting 
a view of media discourses as crucial in connecting citizens’ attitudes and socio-
political changes. 

Lewandowska-Tomaszczyk and Pęzik explore the emotional impact of Polish 
media texts within an interpretative framework that views them as exemplifying the 
presence of an inherently persuasive, political function, which often manifests in 
covert rather than explicit ways. The paper outlines a theoretical innovation in the 
shape of the notion of ‘emergent impoliteness’, which is deployed to categorise 
examples from the representation of Polish political discourse. This method allows 
us to appreciate subtle shading in the instrumental use of the emotions in politics, 
where instances of overt rudeness or insulting language may be supplemented by 
nuanced innuendo which allows the politician to achieve emotional impact while 
maintaining an apparently polite public façade.  

Three contributions focus on Russia, with two articles (Dobrosklonskaya, 
Solopova & Kushneruk) dealing with the specific topic of Russian political 
communication and one (Ozyumenko & Larina) with that of media discourse about 
Russia. Dobrosklonskaya’s paper analyses press coverage of the 75th anniversary 
of victory in WWII, from a Media Linguistics, multimodal perspective, using a 
theorization of press functioning that dates back to the influential model proposed, 
in 1965, by Galtung and Ruge. Drawing on a previous paper of her own 
(Dobrosklonskaya 2020), Dobrosklonskaya argues that the stage at which the press 
‘interpret’ the events for their readers is the most relevant for focusing on emotional 
effects. The analysis enables us to appreciate the role of emotional discourse in 
fostering a sense of national unity; more precisely, that emotions are central in 
mediated political interpretations of significant public events. 

While Dobrosklonskaya’s study regards media discourse within Russia, 
Solopova and Kushneruk present a diachronic study that explores the role of 
emotional press discourse that centres on the image of Russia itself in western eyes, 
and how variance in these patterns across time reflects alterations in the geo-
political landscape. The study, like Dobrosklonskaya’s, focuses on the Second 
World War, when Russia’s status as a key ally in the fight against Nazi Germany 
encouraged the use of positive discursive frames regarding Russia, in press 
discourse emphasizing her heroic qualities, her military might, her friendship with 
Britain. The warmth of these representations may surprise readers more accustomed 
to see Russia framed as a bear with the “surly, uncouth, burly, shambling, enraged, 
violent” features of a wild animal, as she is apt to appear in contemporary press 
discourse. The study accounts for these changes and their corresponding emotional 
valences in terms of a theory that views press frames as subservient to wider 
political goals of the specific national groups in question. 

Following on from this paper, that of Ozyumenko and Larina enlarges on its 
discussion of the innate social forces that drive such strategies of framing, arguing 
that we are witnessing an authentic strategy of emotional manipulation on the part 

593 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

of western media, in the service of creating fear of a so-called ‘Russian threat’, with 
the aim of justifying hard-line policies of containment and aggression. With ample 
reference to existing literature on the role of emotional discourse in political life, 
the paper uses data from British and American press sources to support its  
far-reaching thesis. As in the paper by Lewandowska-Tomaszczyk and Pęzik, the 
authors distinguish between implicit and explicit emotional effects, and also 
identify nuances, or degrees, of feeling in representations of political discourse 
regarding Russia. In terms of explicit effects, they discuss the press’ use of idioms, 
hyperboles, metaphors, word play, cultural images and animalistic symbols. What 
emerges is a view of western media that, in recent times, has increased its reliance 
on emotional discourse, in collusion with a political class that has its own reasons 
for wishing to create a state of ‘panic’ about Russia amongst the general public.  

Finally, the contributions of Ponton and Way point to how multimodality has 
been deployed in social media as a form of satire, parody, and critique. Their papers 
focus on memes as a new form of persuasive media discourse that has leveraged 
the emotions considerably. Way looks at public reactions to former US President 
Donald Trump as they were posted on an Alt-Right website, and finds that these 
memes lean on emotional discourses about nationalism, racism and 
authoritarianism. Significantly, Way reminds us that all memes are now part of a 
new politics which does “not communicate to us in logical arguments, but 
emotionally and affectively through short quips and images that entertain”. This, of 
course, has often been the case with satire in the media but new ways of producing, 
distributing and consuming such messages, as well as the capability of 
multimodally combining different discursive forms should make us reflect on the 
extent to which both satire and extremist discourses are entangled with emotions 
and media. Ponton’s work explores the pragmatic potentialities of this new 
communicative genre the meme, seeing them largely in terms of the traditional 
canons for political satire, i.e. ‘speaking the truth to power’. Naturally, the 
emotional mainspring of these multimodal productions tends to be laughter, though 
nestling within this initial response are other emotions such as disgust, anger, 
frustration, fear, etc. Ponton’s perspective on satirical political memes sees them as 
aligned with other persuasive political artefacts, subverting the viewers’ opinions, 
and in ideal cases producing alignment. Like the viruses to which they are 
frequently compared, they may enter cognitive systems and produce their 
unpredictable effects largely without reference to the viewers’ wishes or will. 

 
4. Concluding remarks 

As with many other types of scientific enquiry, our exploration of the 
emotionalisation of media discourse has only been able to provide a snapshot, rather 
than a full picture of the complex interplay between media, emotions and discourse. 
Nevertheless, we believe we have provided some solid evidence for how the 
mediatization of emotions is a feature of every-day social life and for how language 
(in its wider interpretation as a system of signs) and discourse (in its larger social 
ramifications) are inextricably part of it.  

594 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

By way of summarising the contribution of this Special Issue to the 
advancement of the literature in the field, we would like to highlight some of our 
key findings. We have suggested that emotionalisation has increasingly become one 
of the pivotal features of media discourse, and that this has primarily been achieved 
through a discursive shift from logos to pathos whereby rational arguments give 
way to the tendency to leverage on feelings. We have critically suggested that a 
crucial driver of this shift, and in general of the use of emotions by media actors, 
has been the aim of achieving effective persuasive strategies. Methodologically, we 
have demonstrated that adopting a critical approach (such as Critical Discourse 
Analysis) can help us understand the potential impact of such persuasive strategies 
and their pragmatic and perlocutionary effects on audiences and, more generally, 
on the implementation of specific political and ideological goals. These processes 
can only be fully explicated by taking the context and its socio-political, historical 
and cultural dimensions into account. To put it simply, an interdisciplinary 
approach to linguistic enquiry has numerous practical advantages. We have also 
highlighted the merit of exploring the analysis of emotional discourses via a 
multimodal approach that looks at language in its different semiotic realisations. As 
our studies show, such a diversity of methods and approaches should be helpful in 
triangulating and thus corroborating the interpretation of our results. 

It is our hope that this Special Issue will not represent a terminus but rather a 
point of departure for future investigations of the emotionalisation of public 
discourse on the back of the research agenda that we have just outlined, and in the 
light of any topical issues that our societies will be faced with. We would 
particularly encourage any further research on the emotionalisation of media 
discourse that focuses on the production of emotions in different media (such as the 
press, TV, social media), and genres (news items, commentaries, interviews, 
political speeches, political debates, etc.), and their reception among different 
audiences. 

The editors would like to take this opportunity to thank our contributors and 
compliment them on the quality of their contributions to this Special Issue. Thanks 
to them, a lively, interconnected debate has been presented on this topical issue, 
that will add to the growing body of linguistic research on these important themes. 
We are open to suggestions of the form these might take; seminars, conferences, 
individual or group initiatives, and so on. Most of all it is our hope that readers will 
be inspired by these papers to contribute their own research in these areas, and that 
they will find practical tools that will assist them with their analytical projects. 

 
RU	

 
1. Введение 

Эмоции лежат в основе человеческого взаимодействия и общения, и, как 
свидетельствуют многочисленные исследования в области психологии,  
социологии и лингвистики, их роль в последние годы заметно возросла  

595 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

(см. например, Alba-Juez & Larina 2018, Lerner & Rivkin-Fish 2021, Mackenzie 
& Alba-Juez 2019, Scherer 2005, Wetherell 2012, 2015, Волкова & Панченко 
2018, Шаховский 2008, 2018 и многие др.). Исследователи отмечают повсе-
местное присутствие эмоциональности в современной культуре, где «эмоции 
становятся более важными, чем что-либо еще» (Lerner & Rivkin-Fish 2021: 1). 
Они показали, что как эксплицитные, так и имплицитные средства эмоцио-
нальности расширили свои функции в различных социальных сферах и дис-
курсах. Таким образом, термин эмоционализация используется для обозначе-
ния интенсификации и легитимации эмоций и эмоционального дискурса в об-
щественных сферах жизни (Ahmed 2014, Holmes 2010, Lerner & Rivkin-Fish 
2021, Sieben & Wettergren 2010, Woodward 2009). Как и в повседневном меж-
личностном взаимодействии, эмоционализация наблюдается в институцио-
нальной, профессиональной и административной сферах (см. Lerner & Rivkin-
Fish 2021). По наблюдениям исследователей, не являются исключением ди-
пломатический, экономический и финансовый дискурсы, для которых обра-
щение к эмоциям считается нехарактерным (например, Беляков 2015, 
Mackenzie 2018, Zappettini & Unerman 2016). Эмоции играют существенную 
роль в академическом дискурсе (Gretzky & Lerner 2021, El-Dakhsetal 2019, 
Larina & Ponton 2020, Lerner, Zbenovich & Kaneh-Shalit 2021). Некоторые уче-
ные отмечают, что чрезвычайно сложно отделить эмоции от идеологии, по-
скольку чувства и идеи, которые их вызывают, тесно связаны друг с другом 
(Wetherell et al. 2015: 57). Как подчеркивает Р. Бриз (2020: 22), эмоции явля-
ются неотъемлемым компонентом политического дискурса именно из-за их 
эмоционального / аффективного воздействия на целевую аудиторию  
(см. также Breeze 2019). Эмоционализация широко распространена в сред-
ствах массовой информации (Alba-Juez & Mackenzie 2019, Altheide 2002, 
2006, Antipova et al. 2021, de Marlangeon 2018, Dövelingetal 2011, Furedi 2018, 
Schwab & Schwender 2011, Vishnyakova & Polyakova 2017 и др.), где эмоции 
используются как одно из важнейших средств убеждения. Их исследование 
необходимо для понимания того, как создаются сообщения, а также как они 
влияют на индивидуальное и социальное поведение и социальную жизнь  
общества в целом (Döveling et al. 2011). 

Наш специальный выпуск посвящен отмеченным выше тенденциям и их 
проявлению в СМИ. Таким образом, наша цель состоит в том, чтобы иссле-
довать эмоции в СМИ с семиотической, прагматической и дискурсивной  
точек зрения на фоне современного социально-политического контекста, где 
традиционные представления о роли СМИ, их профессиональных практиках 
претерпевают существенные изменения в результате применения новых  
технологий, которые создают возможности для более интерактивных форм 
общения, осуществляемых через социальные сети (Assimakopoulos et al. 2018, 
Bou-Franch & Garcés-Conejos Blitvich 2019, Breeze 2020 и др.).  

На фоне этих изменений мы видим появление новых возможностей 
(например, гражданская журналистика), которые демократизируют информа-
ционную функцию, обычно реализуемую в традиционных формах. Между 

596 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

тем современные медиаплатформы ставят новые задачи в отношении произ-
водства, распространения и потребления информации, поскольку различия 
между публичной и частной сферой становятся все более размытыми. Эти  
вопросы находят отражение в дискурсивных возможностях во всех  
контекстах общественной жизни, включая политические дебаты и дискуссии 
по разнообразным социальным темам.  

 
2. Эмоционализация медийного дискурса: области исследования 
В изменяющемся медиаландшафте взаимодействие языка и общества 

необходимо исследовать по намеченным основным направлениям. В нашем 
специальном выпуске это делается через призму эмоционализации. Исследо-
вание того, как языковой фрейм может пересекаться с эмоционализацией  
медийного дискурса, строится вокруг трех, на наш взгляд, ключевых вопро-
сов, требующих ответа, а именно ЧТО, ПОЧЕМУ и КАК. Поэтому мы хотели 
бы предложить в качестве основных векторов исследований СМИ и эмоций 
три ключевые области, в которых «что», «почему» и «как» в значительной 
степени пересекаются. 

Первая область исследования связана с логикой производства и восприя-
тия медиапродукта. Информационные и развлекательные цели, наряду  
с социальной, политической и коммерческой повесткой дня, всегда лежали в 
основе медиапроизводства. Для достижения этих целей СМИ часто задей-
ствуют эмоции (например, путем создания сенсации в новостном сообще-
нии). Однако возникает вопрос, как средства массовой информации выпол-
няют эти функции в условиях постоянно меняющегося социального и поли-
тического ландшафта. Например, как пресса выполняет функцию убеждения 
с учетом новых мультимодальных и цифровых форм коммуникации? И глав-
ное, в чьих интересах и с какой политической целью? Таким образом, иссле-
дование эмоционализации медийного дискурса должно помочь нам понять не 
только то, какие дискурсы производятся средствами массовой информации, 
но и почему они производятся и распространяются. 

Роль СМИ в формировании общественного мнения и влиянии на него 
трудно переоценить. В связи с этим формирование эмоций и обращение к ним 
должно в значительной степени рассматриваться как средство реализации 
стратегии убеждения. Например, «моральная паника» ('moral panic')  
(т.е. наведение паники по вопросу моральных норм поведения), подпитывае-
мая и усиливаемая средствами массовой информации, широко обсуждается с 
шестидесятых годов (Cohen 2011). Теперь она фокусируется на новых темах, 
например, иммиграция и эмоциональный ответ на нее в виде страха и непри-
ятия (Kopytowska & Chilton 2018, Wodak 2015, Zappettini 2021). В этом смысле 
информационная ценность того или иного медийного освещения должна 
определяться в первую очередь тем, насколько она отвечает конкретной ком-
муникативной повестке дня, которая в конечном итоге реагирует на основные 
«социальные тревоги» (Delanty 2008) и страх перед «чужими» (Bauman 2016). 

597 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

Как известно, преобладание страха в публичном дискурсе может способство-
вать формированию определенного отношения и приводить к ответной  
социальной политике, что в итоге способствует усилению государственного 
контроля и надзора (Altheide & Michalowski 1999: 476). Соответственно, мы 
также должны объяснить, как осуществляемое через СМИ нагнетание страха 
и обращение к другим эмоциям может служить легитимации различных по-
литических и/или коммерческих проектов (см. Cap 2017, Doudaki & Boubouka 
2019, Kopytowska & Chilton 2018, Koschut 2020, Ozyumenko & Larina в этом 
выпуске, Sedláková & Kopytowska 2018, Trajkova 2020). 

В рамках первой проблемной области исследования одним из важней-
ших следует считать вопрос о решающей роли эмоций в том, как и почему 
создаются те или иные медиадискурсы. Однако не менее важным является и 
вопрос о том, как и почему они воспринимаются и потребляются аудиторией. 
Хотя многие исследования показали, как частое повторение определенных 
медийных нарративов может привести к «кумулятивному эффекту» (Bell 
1996), который в итоге вызывает определенные отношения читателей, направ-
ление причинно-следственной связи (кто на кого влияет) между СМИ и ауди-
торией не является линейным и его лучше рассматривать как взаимно консти-
туирующее. То есть СМИ укрепляют определенные взгляды, уже сформиро-
ванные среди их аудитории, а аудитория затем предпочитает те СМИ, кото-
рые совпадают с ее взглядами. Таким образом, нам необходимо рассматри-
вать различные потенциальные дискурсивные стороны производства и  
потребления (van Dijk 1988), в которых имеет место эмоционализация СМИ. 

Вторая исследовательская область касается границ медиадискурса. 
Здесь мы хотели бы обратить внимание как минимум на две взаимосвязанные 
тенденции. Одна заключается в том, что тональность социально-политиче-
ских медиадебатов смещается от логоса к пафосу или даже ирреалису, т.е.  
от аргументированных дебатов по актуальным проблемам – к более прямым 
заявлениям, часто основанным на различных формах эмоциональности или 
конструктах, которые не соответствуют действительности и не связаны с  
какой-либо логикой. Это так называемые фейковые новости, которые довольно 
широко распространены в «обществе постправды» (D'Ancona 2017). Однако, 
даже отвергая аргумент ради уменьшения зависимости от логоса, модель соци-
альной интуиции Дж. Хайдта (Haidt 2001) говорит нам, что моральный аргу-
мент является следствием моральной интуиции (то есть оценки, основанной на 
«внутреннем чувстве», которое в свою очередь базируется на эмоциях), тем  
самым подчеркивается важность ориентированных на пафос дискурсов. 

Отражением этих процессов являются платформы социальных сетей,  
такие как Facebook и Twitter, сделавшие возможным взаимодействие, в кото-
ром сдвинуты границы между частным и общедоступным, где размышления 
о внутренней сущности сочетаются с осмыслением социальных отношений и 
созданием коллективной идентичности (Lerner & Rivkin-Fish 2021: 6).  
Социальные сети следует рассматривать не просто как платформы, а как  

598 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

самостоятельные социальные и политические акторы / институты, поскольку 
они обладают способностью сдерживать и поляризировать дебаты и контро-
лировать наше взаимодействие с помощью алгоритмов, которые в конечном 
итоге основаны на наших эмоциях. Это ставит вопросы о дискурсивных  
возможностях и в более общем плане – об институционализации социальной 
реальности (Berger & Luckman 1966). 

Можно утверждать, что степень симпатии к недавним президентам 
США – Бараку Обаме и, в еще большей степени, Дональду Трампу, в немалой 
степени зависела от того, каким образом их эмоциональная привлекатель-
ность, передаваемая через доступные новые технологии, находила отклик  
у аудитории, и от использования ими новых медиаплатформ. В частности,  
в случае с Трампом был зафиксирован новый феномен, когда эмоциональные 
реакции политического лидера напрямую передавались субъектам, в букваль-
ном смысле – последователям, минуя все известные ранее фильтры, характер-
ные для традиционных СМИ. Это не единичный пример, который также  
свидетельствует о доминировании пафоса над логосом. Данное явление  
в целом стало характерной чертой политического дискурса. 

Другие социальные платформы, такие как Youtube и Facebook, тоже пре-
терпели аналогичные изменения, допуская более прямое взаимодействие 
между сторонами, участвующими в политическом процессе, и позволяя  
обмениваться эмоциональными репликами, которые легко скатываются к 
крайней степени интенсивности. Оскорбления, резкая критика, нападки, лич-
ные выпады, тирады встречаются чаще, чем гиперболическое восхищение, 
преувеличенная похвала, выражения симпатии и любви, хотя последнее тоже 
имеет место. Исследователи отмечают, что, как положительные, так и отри-
цательные эмоции притягивают и удерживают интерес аудитории (Bassols, 
Cros & Torrent 2013). 

Таким образом, вторая из выделенных нами тенденций – это повышенная 
эмоционализация языка СМИ, регулирование которого также требует изуче-
ния. Новые медиа используются в качестве инструмента пропаганды для фор-
мирования различных идеологических установок. В некоторых случаях, 
например, для пропаганды языка вражды, считается возможным снижение 
порога допустимости того, что можно говорить в общественной сфере 
(Wodak 2019). В ответ мы наблюдаем усиление дебатов по проблеме полит-
корректности в языке СМИ (Assimakopoulos et al. 2018). Вопрос о том,  
до какой степени должна применяться «словесная гигиена» (Cameron 2012)  
(и должна ли она применяться), выходит за рамки данной статьи, так как он 
включает более широкую проблему прескриптивизма, которая заслуживает 
отдельного изучения. 

Третья область исследования охватывает семиотические ресурсы, ис-
пользуемые СМИ, и связанные с ними прагматические импликации. Нам, линг-
вистам, семиотикам и социологам, необходимо адаптировать исследование 
«аффективно-дискурсивных практик» (Wetherelletal. 2015: 57) и стратегий к 

599 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

изменяющемуся медиаландшафту, сосредоточив внимание на вербальных 
средствах конструирования эмоциональности с помощью лексико-граммати-
ческих ресурсов, таких как метафора, сравнение и другие риторические при-
емы (Emanatian 1995, Handa 2013, Richardson 2007), и невербальных средствах 
(размер шрифта, размер заголовка, использование цвета, изображений и т.д.), 
тем самым признавая важность мультимодальности в реализации дискурсов 
(см. Dancygier & Vandelanotte 2017, Ponton 2016). Мультимодальное построе-
ние смысла в «текстах-изображениях» (Mitchell 1986), встречающееся  
в мемах (Denisova 2019, Mina 2019), в первую очередь отдает предпочтение 
эмоциональному параметру коммуникации. Действительно, с помощью сим-
волического языка эмотиконов опытные пользователи могут передавать ряд 
эмоциональных реакций на размещенный контент, и таким образом создается 
интерактивное измерение, которое позволяет и поощряет наличие эмоцио-
нального компонента. Хотя Мультимодальная теория (Kress & van Leeuwen 
2010, Bateman et al. 2017 и др.) находится еще только на начальной стадии 
развития, она представляет собой неоценимый вклад, как теоретический, так 
и практический, в дискурс-анализ в целом (Alba-Juez 2009, Ponton & Larina 
2016, 2017), поскольку она направлена на объяснение значений в преоблада-
ющих семиотических практиках компьютерного века. Эти практики часто 
связаны с новыми кодами, заложенными в цвете, числах и других знаках  
современного символизма (Faliang et al. 2017) и широко распространены 
среди опытных, в основном молодых, пользователей нового поколения. Нако-
нец, важно помнить, что любой знак (будь то текст или изображение) имеет 
смысл в определенном коммуникативном контексте, который должен быть 
общим у создателя и получателя сообщения. Как косвенно демонстрируют 
некоторые статьи этого выпуска (например, Музолф, Солопова и Кушнерук, 
Заппеттини), используемые в СМИ семиотические ресурсы основаны на 
культурно-специфичных системах, которые аналитик должен интерпретиро-
вать с эмической позиции, т.е. с позиции носителя конкретной культуры. 

 
3. Статьи этого выпуска 

Представленные в данном выпуске исследования, основанные на различ-
ных методологических подходах и имеющие разные аналитические фокусы, 
рассматривают ряд сформулированных выше ключевых вопросов. 

Исследование Питера Булла и Мориса Уоддла посвящено эмоциональ-
ным реакциям телевизионной аудитории на речи политиков. Опираясь на ра-
боты M. Аткинсона по интерактивному поведению выступающего и аудито-
рии и расширяя его подход, Булл и Уоддл детально исследуют динамику  
реакций аудитории (например, аплодисменты или освистывание) в различ-
ных национальных контекстах. Это исследование проливает свет на тонкое 
взаимодействие между риторическими приемами, используемыми полити-
ками для получения реакции аудитории, которая, по мнению авторов, может 
рассматриваться как проявление разной степени ее эмоциональности.  

600 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

Значимость данного исследования в том, что в его фокусе не только пропози-
ции высказываний, но и в значительной степени аффективные и эмоциональ-
ные элементы, оно способствует пониманию политической коммуникации. 

Три статьи выпуска посвящены эмоциональной окраске медийного дис-
курса, касающегося дебатов и событий, связанных с Брекситом. Известный 
исследователь политической метафоры Андреас Музолф (Musolff 2004, 2016, 
2019) анализирует использование пословицы You cannot have your cake and 
eat it1 в газетных текстах, выступлениях и интервью политиков, чтобы дока-
зать, что гиперболическое использование пословицы способствовало разви-
тию высокоэмоциональных дискурсов, связанных с метафорическими сцена-
риями освобождения (в конкретном случае – освобождения Великобритании 
от «гнета» Евросоюза). Музолф идет еще дальше и высказывает предположе-
ние о том, что распространение данной метафоры, на которой основывались  
многие аргументы в пользу того, чтобы выходить из Евросоюза или оста-
ваться в нем, привело к поляризации и радикализации политического  
дискурса Великобритании. 

Аналогичные идеи выдвигает и Франко Заппеттини, который, анализи-
руя язык британской бульварной прессы, показывает, что эмоционально 
нагруженные представления о Великобритании как жертве и Евросоюзе как 
притеснителе, вызвали множество публичных дискуссий на этапах перегово-
ров по Брекситу. Заппеттини указывает на важную роль эмоционального 
языка бульварной прессы в формировании общественного мнения об отноше-
ниях Великобритании и ЕС не только в контексте Брексита, но и в более  
широком историческом освещении евроновостей,  поскольку он эффективно 
помогал повестке дня Брексита по принципу «пафос выше логоса». Важно 
отметить, что такое эмоциональное оформление Брексита стало доминирую-
щим дискурсом кампании по выходу из Евросоюза в отличие от дискурса  
кампании против выхода, который был основан на «холодных фактах» 
(Zappettini 2019). 

Барбара Данцигер также рассматривает дискурс Брексита на этапе пере-
говоров. В фокусе ее внимания – эмоциональные реакции на нарративные 
сравнения ‘Brexit is / feels like…’2 . Она показывает, как сравнения могут сиг-
нализировать о разном отношении к Брекситу. В статье подробно исследу-
ется, как использовались подобные сравнения для выражения эмоциональной 
позиции по конкретным аспектам Брексита, делается акцент на том, как  
обычные граждане концептуализировали Брексит и как они отреагировали на 
его реализацию. Как Заппеттини и Музолф, Данцигер демонстрирует взаимо-
связь между языковыми формами и предполагаемыми эмоциональными  
реакциями на них, подтверждая мнение об основополагающей роли СМИ  

                                                            
1 Букв.: Ты не можешь одновременно иметь свой пирог и съесть его. Приблизительные  

русские аналоги этой пословицы – совместить несовместимое; пытаться усидеть на двух стульях. 
2 Букв.: «Брексит – это / Брексит ощущается как …»). 

601 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

в обеспечении связи между отношениями граждан и социально-политиче-
скими изменениями. 

Барбара Левандовска-Томашчик и Петр Пензик исследуют эмоциональ-
ное воздействие польских медиатекстов, показывая, что они выполняют при-
сущую им политическую функцию убеждения скорее при помощи скрытых, 
чем явных средств и способов. В статье рассматривается новое в теоретиче-
ском плане понятие «возникающая невежливость» (“emergent impoliteness”), 
которое используется для категоризации примеров, взятых из польского  
политического дискурса. Предложенный в исследовании метод позволил  
увидеть тонкие оттенки в использовании эмоций в политическом дискурсе, 
где случаи явной грубости или оскорбительной лексики могут быть допол-
нены намеками, двусмысленными выражениями, которые позволяют поли-
тику добиться желаемого эмоционального воздействия, сохраняя при этом 
явно вежливую публичную тональность.  

Следующие три статьи посвящены российскому политическому дис-
курсу, а также дискурсу западных СМИ о России. В статье Т.Г. Добросклон-
ской с позиций медиалингвистики и мультимодальности анализируется  
освещение 75-й годовщины победы в Великой отечественной войне. Автор 
использует теорию функционирования прессы (Galtung & Ruge 1965) и,  
развивая идеи своей предыдущей статьи (Добросклонская 2020), утверждает, 
что этап, на котором пресса «интерпретирует» события для своих читателей, 
наиболее важен для эмоционального воздействия. Её анализ позволяет  
оценить роль эмоционального дискурса в воспитании чувства национального 
единства и показывает, что эмоции занимают центральное место в политиче-
ской интерпретации значимых общественных событий в СМИ. 

Если исследование Т.Г. Добросклонской касается медийного дискурса 
внутри России, то О.А. Солопова и С.Л. Кушнерук представляют диахрони-
ческое исследование, в котором рассматривается роль эмоционального пресс-
дискурса, представляющего образ России в глазах Запада. В статье показано, 
как изменение этого образа во времени соотносится с изменениями в геопо-
литическом ландшафте. Исследование, так же сосредоточено на Второй  
мировой войне, когда статус России как ключевого союзника в борьбе с 
нацистской Германией способствовал использованию позитивных дискур-
сивных фреймов в отношении России, в дискурсе прессы подчеркивались ее 
героические качества, военная мощь и дружба с Великобританией. Теплота 
этих представлений может удивить читателей, более привыкших видеть  
Россию в дискурсе современной прессы в образе медведя и с чертами угрю-
мого, неуклюжего, разъяренного и жестокого дикого животного. Авторы  
объясняют эти изменения и соответствующие им эмоциональные  
валентности с точки зрения теории, которая определяет рамки прессы как 
подчиненные более широким политическим целям конкретных националь-
ных групп. 

В следующей статье В.И. Озюменко и Т.В. Ларина продолжают анализ 
процессов, которые управляют стратегиями фрейминга, утверждая, что мы 

602 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

являемся свидетелями реального эмоционального манипулирования со  
стороны западных СМИ, служащих нагнетанию страха перед так называемой 
«российской угрозой» с целью оправдания жесткой и агрессивной политики 
сдерживания. Для подтверждения своего смелого тезиса авторы ссылаются 
на современную литературу о роли эмоционального дискурса в сфере поли-
тики и приводят многочисленные иллюстративные примеры из британской  
и американской прессы. Как и в статье Б. Левандовской-Томашчик и  
П. Пензика, авторы различают эксплицитные и имплицитные способы эмоци-
онального воздействия, а также определяют нюансы и оттенки чувств  
в репрезентации политического дискурса о России. Среди эксплицитных 
средств воздействия обсуждается использование прессой идиом, гипербол, 
метафор, игра слов, культурные образы и анималистические символы, среди 
имлицитных рассматриваются пресуппозиция, вопросительные заголовки, 
проксимизация и др. Развивается тезис о том, что западные СМИ в последнее 
время все больше прибегают к эмоциональному дискурсу, обслуживая опре-
деленный политический класс, у которого есть свои причины поддерживать 
среди широкой публики состояние «паники» и страха в отношении России. 

И, наконец, Дуглас Марк Понтон и Линдон Уэй показывают, как мульти-
модальность используется в социальных сетях в таких жанрах, как сатира, па-
родия и критика. В их статьях рассматриваются мемы как новая влиятельная 
форма медиадискурса, в значительной степени использующая эмоции.  
Понтон исследует прагматические возможности мемов, рассматривая их  
в основном с точки зрения традиционных канонов политической сатиры. 
Эмоциональной движущей силой этих мультимодальных сюжетов является 
смех, хотя за этой первоначальной реакцией скрываются и другие эмоции,  
такие как отвращение, гнев, страх и т.д. С точки зрения Понтона, сатириче-
ские политические мемы связаны с другими средствами воздействия. Они 
влияют на мнения зрителей и в идеальных случаях достигают своей цели. По-
добно вирусам, с которыми их часто сравнивают, они проникают в сознание 
и в значительной степени добиваются своих непредсказуемых результатов 
независимо от желания или воли зрителей. Линдон Уэй рассматривает реак-
цию общества на бывшего президента США Дональда Трампа на сайте  
Alt-Right и показывает, что посвященные ему мемы основаны на эмоциональ-
ных дискурсах о национализме, расизме и авторитаризме. Примечательно, 
что Уэй напоминает нам, что мемы теперь являются частью новой политики, 
которая «общается с нами не логическими аргументами, а эмоционально – 
через короткие шутки и забавные образы». Сатира, конечно, часто встреча-
ется в СМИ, но новые способы создания, распространения и потребления та-
ких сообщений, а также возможность мультимодального комбинирования 
различных дискурсивных форм должны заставить нас задуматься не только  
о том, как сатира, но и как экстремистские дискурсы переплетаются  
с эмоциями и СМИ.  

 

603 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

4. Заключение 
Мы не претендуем на то, что наш специальный выпуск, посвященный 

эмоционализации медиадискурса, дает полную картину сложного взаимодей-
ствия между медиа, эмоциями и дискурсом. Мы лишь очертили основные  
области исследований и попытались ответить на ряд актуальных вопросов. 
Тем не менее, мы полагаем, что представили убедительные доказательства 
того, что медиатизация эмоций стала особенностью повседневной социаль-
ной жизни, и показали, как эмоционализация СМИ реализуются через язык  
(в его более широкой интерпретации как системы знаков) и дискурс (в его 
широких социальных ответвлениях).  

Подводя итоги обсуждения данной темы, мы хотели бы выделить неко-
торые из основных результатов. Предложенные исследования свидетель-
ствуют о том, что эмоционализация становится одной из основных черт  
медиадискурса, и это в первую очередь достигается за счет дискурсивного 
перехода от логоса к пафосу, когда рациональные аргументы уступают место 
тенденции воздействовать на чувства аудитории. Мы полагаем, что решаю-
щим фактором этого сдвига и в целом использования эмоций акторами медиа 
является поиск эффективных стратегий убеждения. Что касается методоло-
гии, мы продемонстрировали, что критический дискурс-анализ может помочь 
понять потенциальное влияние стратегий убеждения и их прагматическое  
и перлокутивное воздействие на аудиторию и, в более общем плане,  
на реализацию конкретных политических и идеологических целей. Эти  
процессы могут быть полностью объяснены только с учетом контекста и его 
социально-политических, исторических и культурных аспектов, что говорит 
о том, что междисциплинарный подход к лингвистическому исследованию 
имеет множество практических преимуществ. Мы также подчеркнули необ-
ходимость анализа эмоциональных дискурсов с помощью мультимодального 
подхода, который рассматривает язык в его различных семиотических реали-
зациях. Как показывают наши исследования, такое разнообразие методов  
и подходов может дать надежные результаты. 

Мы надеемся, что этот специальный выпуск станет стимулом для буду-
щих исследований эмоционализации публичного дискурса в намеченных 
нами направлениях и в свете актуальных социальных и политических про-
блем современного общества. Представляются перспективными дальнейшие 
исследования эмоций в различных видах СМИ (пресса, телевидение, радио, 
социальные сети и др.) и жанрах (новости, комментарии, интервью,  
политические выступления, политические дебаты и др.) и анализ их восприя-
тия различными аудиториями. 

Мы хотели бы воспользоваться этой возможностью, чтобы поблагода-
рить всех авторов за поддержку нашего проекта и высокое качество прислан-
ных статей. Благодаря вашему участию нам удалось провести живую дискус-
сию, которая пополнит междисциплинарные лингвистические исследования 
по этой важной теме. Мы надеемся на продолжение сотрудничества  

604 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

и открыты для предложений о том, какую форму оно может принять: семи-
нары, конференции, индивидуальные или групповые инициативы и так далее. 
Больше всего мы надеемся, что наш специальный выпуск вдохновит читате-
лей на проведение исследований в этих областях и что они найдут в нем  
практические инструменты, которые помогут в реализации аналитических 
проектов. 
 

© Franco Zappettini, Douglas M. Ponton and Tatiana V. Larina, 2021 

 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License  

https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
 

Acknowledgments  
This publication has been supported by the RUDN University Strategic Academic 
Leadership Programme.  

 
REFERENCES 

Ahmed, Sara. 2014. The Cultural Politics of Emotion. 2 ed-n. Routledge.  
Alba-Juez, Laura. 2009. Perspectives on Discourse Analysis. Theory and practice. Cambridge 

Scholars Publishing. 
Alba-Juez, Laura & Tatiana Larina. 2018. Language and emotion: Discourse-pragmatic 

perspectives. Russian Journal of Linguistics. (Special issue: The Discourse of Emotion). 
22 (1), 9–37. https://doi.org/10.22363/2312-9182-2018-22-1-9-37 

Alba-Juez, Laura & J. Lachlan Mackenzie. 2019. Emotion, lies and bullshit in journalistic 
discourse: The case of fake news. Ibérica 38. 17–50. 

Altheide, David. 2002. Creating Fear: News and the Construction of a Crisis. New York: 
Aldine de Gruyter. 

Altheide, David L. 2006. Terrorism and the Politics of Fear. Lanham, MD: Alta Mira Press. 
Altheide, David & Sam Michalowski. 1999. Fear in the news: A discourse of control. The 

Sociological Quarterly 40 (3). 475–503.  
Antipova, Alina S., Maria D. Rabeson & Olga V. Smirnova. 2021. Semantic shift in conflict 

terminology in contemporary Russian socio-cultural media discourse. Training, Language 
and Culture 5 (2). 73–89. https://doi.org/10.22363/2521-442X-2021-5-2-73-89 

Assimakopoulos, Stavros, Fabienne H. Baider & Sharon Millar. 2018. Online hate speech in 
the European Union: a discourse-analytic perspective. Springer. 

Barlett, Christopher & Douglas Gentile. 2011. Affective and emotional consequences of the 
mass media. In Döveling, Katrin, Christian von Scheve, and Elly A. Konijn (eds.), The 
Routledge Handbook of Emotions and Mass Media. London and New York: Routledge. 
60–78. 

Bassols, Margarida, Anna Cros & Anna M. Torrent. 2013. Emotionalization in new television 
formats of science popularization. Pragmatics 23 (4). 605–632.  

Bateman, John, Janina Wildfeuer & Tuomo Hiippala 2017. Multimodality: Foundations, 
Research and Analysis – A Problem-Oriented Introduction. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 

Bauman, Zygmunt. 2016. Strangers at Our Door. Polity.  
Bell, Alan. 1996. The language of news media. Oxford: Blackwell. 

605 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

Belyakov, Mikhail V. 2015. Emotive character of diplomatic discourse. Russian Journal of 
Linguistics 2. 11–17. (In Russ.) 

Berger, Peter & Thomas Luckmann. 1966. The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in 
the Sociology of Knowledge. New York: Penguin. 

 Bou-Franch, Patricia & Pilar Garcés-Conejos Blitvich (eds.). 2019. Analyzing digital 
discourse: New Insights and Future Directions, 105–131. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham. 

Breeze, Ruth. 2019. Emotion in politics: Affective-discursive practices in UKIP and Labour. 
Discourse & Society 3 (10). 24–43. 

Breeze, Ruth. 2020. Angry tweets: A corpus-assisted study of anger in populist political 
discourse. Journal of Language Aggression and Conflict 8 (1). 118–145. 

Cap, Piotr (ed.). 2017. The Language of Fear: Communicating Threat in Public Discourse. 
London: Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1057/978-1-137-59731-1 

Cohen, Stanley. 2011. Folk Devils and Moral Panics. London: Routledge. 
Cameron, Deborah. 1995. Verbal Hygiene. London: Routledge. 
d'Ancona Matthew. 2017. Post-Truth: The New War on Truth and How to Fight Back. Random 

House. 
Dancygier, Barbara & Lieven Vandelanotte. 2017. Internet memes as multimodal 

constructions. Cognitive Linguistics 28(3). 565–598. 
Denisova, Anastasia. 2019. Internet Memes and Society: Social, Cultural, and Political 

Contexts. NewYork&London: Routledge. 
Delanty, Gerard. 2008. Fear of others: Social exclusion and the European crisis of solidarity. 

Social Policy and Administration 42(6). 676–690. 
de Marlangeon, Silvia Kaul. 2018. Fustigation, impoliteness, emotions and extimacy in 

Argentinian media celebrities. Russian Journal of Linguistics 22(1). 161–174. 
Dobrosklonskaya, Tatiana G. 2020. Medialingvistika: teoriya, metody, napravleniya. Moscow: 

KDU “Dobrosvet” (In Russ.) 
Doudaki, Vaia & Boubouka Angeliki. 2019. Discourses of Legitimation in the News: The Case 

of the Economic Crisis in Greece (1st ed.). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/ 
9780429061325 

Döveling, Katrin, Christian von Scheve & Elly A. Konijn (eds.). 2011. The Routledge 
Handbook of Emotions and Mass Media. London and New York: Routledge. 

El-Dakhs, Dina Abdel Salam, Fatima Ambreen, Maria Zaheer & Yulia Gusarova. 2019.  
A pragmatic analysis of the speech act of criticizing in university teacher-student talk: The 
case of English as a lingua franca. Pragmatics 29 (4). 493–520.  

Emanatian, Michele. 1995. Metaphor and the expression of emotion: The value of cross-cultural 
perspectives. Metaphor and Symbolic Activity 10 (3). 163–182. 

Faliang Huang, Shichao Zhang, Jilian Zhang & Ge Yu. 2017. Multimodal learning for topic 
sentiment analysis in microblogging. Neurocomputing 253. 144–153. 

Furedi, Frank. 2018. How Fear Works: Culture of Fear in the Twenty-First Century. London: 
Bloomsbury Publishing. 

Gammerl, Benno. 2012. Emotional styles – concepts and challenges.” Rethinking History 16(2). 
161–175. https://doi.org/10.1080/13642529.2012.681189 

Gretzky, Maria & Julia Lerner. 2021. Students of academic capitalism: Emotional dimensions 
in the commercialization of higher education. Sociological Research Online. 26 (1)  
205–221. https://doi.org/10.1177/1360780420968117 

Haidt, Jonathan. 2001. The Emotional dog and its rational tail: A social intuitionist approach to 
moral judgment. Psychological Review 108 (4). 814–834. 

Handa, Carolyn 2013. The Multimediated Rhetoric of the Internet: Digital Fusion. New York: 
Routledge. 

606 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

Holmes, Mary. 2010. The emotionalization of reflexivity, Sociology 44 (1). 139–154. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038509351616 

Kopytowska, Monika & Paul Chilton. 2018. “Rivers of blood”: Migration, fear and threat 
construction Lodz Papers in Pragmatics 14 (1). 133–161. Special issue on Narrating 
hostility, challenging hostile narratives. https://doi.org/10.1515/lpp-2018-0007 

Koschut, Simon. 2020. The power of emotions in world politics. London and New York: 
Routledge. 

Kress, Gunther, R. & Theo van Leeuwen. 2010. Reading Images: The Grammar of Visual 
Design. London and New York: Routledge. 

Larina, Tatiana, Vladimir Ozyumenko & Douglas M. Ponton. 2020. Persuasion strategies in 
media discourse about Russia: Linguistic ambiguity and uncertainty. Lodz Papers in 
Pragmatics 15 (1). 3–22. https://doi.org/10.1515/lpp-2019-0002 

Larina, Tatiana & Douglas Mark Ponton. 2020.Tact or frankness in English and Russian blind 
peer reviews. Intercultural Pragmatics 17 (4). 471–496. 

Larina, Tatiana & Douglas Mark Ponton. (forthcoming). I wanted to honour your journal, and 
you spat in my face: Emotive (im)politeness and face in the blind peer review genre. 
Journal of Politeness Research. 

Lerner, Lulia & Michele Rivkin-Fish. 2021. On emotionalisation of public domains. Emotions 
and Society. 3 (1). 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1332/263169021X16149420145743 

Lerner, Julia, Claudia Zbenovich & Tamar Kaneh-Shalit. 2021. Changing meanings of university 
teaching: The emotionalization of academic culture in Russia, Israel, and the USA. Emotions 
and Society. Special Issue Emotionalization of public domains. 3 (1). 73–93. 

Mackenzie, J. Lachlan. 2018. Sentiment and confidence in financial English: A corpus study. 
Russian Journal of Linguistics 22 (1). 80–93. 

Maíz-Arévalo, Carmen. 2018. Emotional self-presentation on WhatsApp: Analysis of profile 
status. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 22 (1). 144–160. 

Mackenzie, J. Lachlan & Laura Alba-Juez (eds.). 2019. Emotion in Discourse. Amsterdam and 
Philadelphia: John Benjamins. 

Mina, An, Xiao. 2019. Memes to Movements: How the World’s Most Viral Media is Changing 
Social Protest and Power. Ebook: Beacon Press. 

Mitchell, William & Thomas John. 1986. Iconology: Image, Text, Ideology. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 

Musolff, Andreas. 2004. Metaphor and political discourse: Analogical reasoning in debates 
about Europe. Palgrave Macmillan. 

Musolff, Andreas. 2016. Political Metaphor Analysis: Discourse and Scenarios. Bloomsbury 
Publishing. 

Musolff, Andreas. 2019. Creativity in metaphor interpretation. Russian Journal of Linguistics, 
23 (1), 23–39. https://doi.org/10.22363/2312-9182-2019-23-1-23-39 

Ponton, Douglas. 2016. Movement and meaning: Towards an integrated approach to political 
discourse analysis. Russian Journal of Linguistics. Special issue: Discourse Analysis 
in the 21st Century: Theory and Practice (I). 20 (4). 122–139. 

Ponton, Douglas & Tatiana Larina. 2016. Discourse analysis in the 21-th century: Theory and 
practice (I). Russian Journal of Linguistics. 20 (4). 7–25. 

Ponton, Douglas & Tatiana Larina. 2017. Discourse analysis in the 21-th century: Theory and 
practice (II). Russian Journal of Linguistics 21 (1). 7–21 

Richardson, John E. 2007. Analysing Newspapers: An Approach from Critical Discourse 
Analysis. London: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Schwab, Frank & Clemens Schwender. 2011. The descent of emotions in media. Darwinian 
perspectives. In K. Döveling, Ch. von Scheve, and E.A. Konijn (eds.), The Routledge 
Handbook of Emotions and Mass Media, 15–36. London and New York: Routledge.  

607 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

Scherer, Klaus R. 2005. What are emotions? And how can they be measured? Social Science 
Information 44(4). 695–729. https://doi.org/10.1177/0539018405058216 

Sedláková, Renáta & Monika Kopytowska. 2018. Different faces of the unknown: The media and 
the semiotics of fear. In Monika Kopytowska & Artur Gałkowski (eds.), Current Perspectives 
in Semiotics: Texts, Genres and Representations, 262–291. Frankfurt: Peter Lang.  

Sieben, Barbara & Asa Wettergren (eds.). 2010. Emotionalizing Organizations and Organizing 
Emotions. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 

Shakhovsky, Viktor. 2008. Linguistic theory of emotions. Moscow: Gnozis Publ. (In Russ.) 
Shakhovsky, Viktor. 2018. The Cognitive Matrix of Emotional-Communicative Personality. 

Russian Journal of Linguistics 22 (1). 54–79. https://doi.org/10.22363/2312-9182-2018-
22-1-54-79 

Trajkova, Zorica. 2020. Media fraiming of the Macedonia name change issue: The use of fear-
inducing language strategies. Lodz Papers in Pragmatics 16 (2). 265–284. 

Van Dijk, Teun Adrian. 1988. News as Discourse. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Volkova, Yana & Panchenko, Nadezhda. 2018. Discourse variation of the concepts of 

destructive emotions. Russian Journal of Linguistics 22 (1). 175–194. https://doi.org/ 
10.22363/2312-9182-2018-22-1-175-194 (In Russ.). 

Vishnyakova, Olga D. & Natalia V. Polyakova. 2017. Linguistic and functional cognitive 
peculiarities of media language as the basis of interpretations in the communicative sphere. 
Training, Language and Culture 1 (2). 86–101. https://doi.org/10.29366/2017tlc.1.2.6  

Yus, Francisco. 2018. Attaching feelings and emotions to propositions. Some Insights on irony 
and Internet communication Russian Journal of Linguistics 22 (1). 64–107. 

Yus, Francisco. 2019. Multimodality in memes: A cyberpragmatic approach. In Patricia Bou-
Franch Pilar Garcés-Conejos Blitvich (eds.). Analyzing digital discourse: New Insights 
and Future Directions, 105–131. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham 

Wetherell, Margaret. 2012. Affect and Emotion: A New Social Science Understanding. London: 
Sage. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446250945 

Wetherell, Margaret. 2015. Trends in the turn to affect: A social psychological critique. Body 
& Society 21(2). 139–166. https://doi.org/10.1177/1357034X14539020 

Wirth, Werner & Holger Schramm. 2005. Media and Emotions. Communication Research 
Trends. 24 (3). 1–39. 

Wodak, Ruth. 2015. The Politics of Fear: What Right-Wing Populist Discourses Mean. 
London: Sage. 

Wodak, Ruth. 2019. ‘The boundaries of what can be said have shifted’: An expert interview 
with Ruth Wodak (questions posed by Andreas Schulz). Discourse & Society. Online first, 
December 2019. 1–10. 

Wodak, Ruth. 2020. ‘The boundaries of what can be said have shifted’: An expert interview 
with Ruth Wodak (questions posed by Andreas Schulz). Discourse & Society 31 (2).  
235–244. https://doi.org/10.1177/0957926519889109 

Woodward, Kathleen. 2009. Statistical Panic: Cultural Politics and Poetics of the Emotions, 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 

Zappettini, Franco. 2019. The Brexit referendum: How trade and immigration in the discourses 
of the official campaigns have legitimised a toxic (inter)national logic. Critical Discourse 
Studies 16 (4). 403–419. 

Zappettini, Franco. 2021. The tabloidization of the Brexit campaign: Power to the (British) 
people?’ Journal of Language and Politics 20 (2). 277–303. https://doi.org/10.1075/ 
jlp.19103.zap 

Zappettini, Franco & Jeffrey Unerman. 2016. “Mixing” and “Bending”: The recontextualisation 
of discourses of sustainability in integrated reporting. Discourse & Communication 10 (5). 
521–542. 

608 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

Article history: 
Received: 15 June 2021 
Accepted: 30 August 2021 
 
История статьи: 
Дата поступления в редакцию: 15 июня 2021 
Дата принятия к печати: 30 августа 2021 
 
Bionotes:  
Franco ZAPPETTINI is a Lecturer and Director of Postgraduate Research in 
Communication and Media at the University of Liverpool, UK. His research focuses on the 
textual/discursive analysis of different forms of political and organisational communication 
including mediated forms of populism, such as tabloid populism and Euroscepticism in the 
British press. He has published internationally in peer-reviewed journals and book series. 
His latest publication is the monograph Brexit: A Critical Discursive Analysis forthcoming 
for Palgrave MacMillan. 
Contact information: 
University of Liverpool 
Foundation Building, Brownlow Hill, Liverpool, L69 7ZX, UK  
e-mail: franco.zappettini@liverpool.ac.uk 
ORCID: 0000-0001-7049-4454 
 
Douglas Mark PONTON is Associate Professor of English Language and Translation at 
the Department of Political and Social Sciences, University of Catania. His research 
interests include political discourse analysis, ecolinguistics, sociolinguistics, applied 
linguistics, pragmatics and critical discourse studies. Recent publications include For 
Arguments Sake: Speaker Evaluation in Modern PoliticalDiscourse and Understanding 
Political Persuasion: Linguistic and Rhetorical Aspects. As well as politics, his research 
deals with a variety of social topics including tourism, the discourse of mediation, ecology, 
local dialect and folk traditions, including proverbs and the Blues. 
Contact information: 
University of Catania 
Via Vittorio Emanuele II 49, Catania, 95131, Italy 
e-mail: dmponton@gmail.com 
ORCID: 0000-0002-9968-1162 
 
Tatiana V. LARINA is Doctor Habil., Full Professor at RUDN University. Her research 
interests embrace language, culture and communication; cross-cultural pragmatics, 
discourse analysis, communicative ethnostyles, and (im)politeness theory with the focus 
on English and Russian languages. She has authored and co-authored over 200 publications 
in Russian and English including monographs, course books, book chapters and articles in 
peer-reviewed journals.  
Сontact information: 
Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia (RUDN University) 
6 Miklukho-Maklaya, Moscow, 117198, Russia 
e-mail: larina-tv@rudn.ru  
ORCID: 0000-0001-6167-455X 

609 



Franco Zappettini et al. Russian Journal of Linguistics 25 (3). 586–610 

Сведения об авторах: 
Франко ЗАППЕТТИНИ имеет степень доктора, преподает в Ливерпульском  
университете, Великобритания, руководит аспирантскими программами в области 
коммуникации и СМИ. Его исследования сосредоточены на текстуальном/дискур-
сивном анализе различных форм политической коммуникации, включая опосредо-
ванные формы популизма, такие как таблоидный популизм и евроскептицизм в бри-
танской прессе. Он публикует свои исследования в рецензируемых международных 
журналах и монографиях. Его последняя публикация – монография Brexit: A Critical 
Discursive Analysis (PalgraveMacMillan). 
Контактная информация: 
University of Liverpool 
Foundation Building, Brownlow Hill, Liverpool, L69 7ZX, UK  
e-mail: franco.zappettini@liverpool.ac.uk 
ORCID: 0000-0001-7049-4454 

Дуглас Марк ПОНТОН – профессор, преподаватель английского языка и перевода 
на кафедре политических и социальных наук в Катанийском университете (Италия). 
Сфера его научных интересов включает анализ политического дискурса, эколингви-
стику, социолингвистику, прикладную лингвистику, прагматику и критический  
дискурс-анализ. Его последние публикации: For Arguments Sake: Speaker Evaluation 
in Modern Political Discourse («Во имя аргументов: оценка оратора в современном 
политическом дискурсе») и Understanding Political Persuasion: Linguistic and 
Rhetorical Aspects («Способы убеждения в политике: лингвистические и риториче-
ские аспекты»). Наряду с политикой интересы Д.М. Понтона связаны с социальной 
тематикой: туризмом, дискурсом медиации, экологией, местными диалектами, 
народными традициями, пословицами и блюзом. 
Контактнаяинформация: 
University of Catania 
Via Vittorio Emanuele II 49 Catania, 95131, Italy 
e-mail: dmponton@gmail.com 
ORCID: 0000-0002-9968-1162 

Татьяна Викторовна ЛАРИНА – доктор филологических наук, профессор 
Российского университета дружбы народов (РУДН). Ее исследовательские интересы 
включают взаимодействие языка, культуры и коммуникации, кросс-культурную 
прагматику, дискурс-анализ, межкультурную коммуникацию, коммуникативную  
этностилистику и теорию не/вежливости. Она является автором и соавтором более 
200 публикаций на русском и английском языках, включая монографии, учебники, 
главы книг, а также многочисленные статьи, в том числе в ведущих международных 
журналах. 
Контактная информация:  
Российский университет дружбы народов 
Россия, 117198, Москва, ул. Миклухо-Маклая, 6 
e-mail: larina-tv@rudn.ru  
ORCID: 0000-0001-6167-455X