2020 Vol. 24 No. 2  219—252 
Russian Journal of Linguistics http://journals.rudn.ru/linguistics

DOI: 10.22363/2687‐0088‐2020‐24‐2‐219‐252 
Introductory article 

Language,	culture	and	ideology	in	discursive	practices	
Magdaléna Bilá1 and Svetlana V. Ivanova2 

1 University of Prešov 
Prešov, Slovakia 

2 Pushkin Leningrad State University 
Saint Petersburg, Russia 

Abstract 
Discursive practices are looked upon as the core notion of discourse theory and the main instrument 
linguists can operate with studying language in connection with society and a human being. In this 
introductory article we will look into how language, culture and ideology are intertwined in diverse 
discursive practices and how these practices are shaped by people representing various cultures, 
ideologies and social entities. As part of linguistic discourse theory, we will briefly outline the major 
objectives and tenets of discourse theory or discourse analysis and track down the reasons why 
discourse theory turned into a dominant linguistic paradigm in the new millennium. Besides, some 
light will be thrown on the advancements and debatable questions arising within discourse theory as 
reflected in its methodology. Then we will give a brief synopsis of each individual paper and 
highlight theoretical and methodological contributions and innovations proposed by our authors. 
The results of the discussion as well as a brief outlook on future research will be summed up at the 
end of the introductory article. 
Keywords: discourse analysis, discursive practices, culture, ideology, identity 

For citation: 
Bilá, Magdaléna and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Language, culture and ideology in discursive 
practices. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252. DOI: 10.22363/2687-0088-2020-
24-2-219-252 

Вступительная статья

Язык,	культура	и	идеология	в	дискурсивных	практиках
М. Била1, С.В. Иванова2 

1 Прешовский университет в Прешове 
Прешов, Словакия 

2 Ленинградский государственный университет имени А.С. Пушкина 
Санкт-Петербург, Россия 

Аннотация 
Дискурсивные практики рассматриваются в качестве основополагающего понятия теории 
дискурса и основного инструмента, при помощи которого лингвисты могут изучать язык в 
связи с обществом и человеком. Данная вводная статья, как и весь выпуск, посвящены 

219 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

вопросу о том, как язык, культура и идеология переплетаются в различных дискурсивных 
практиках и как эти практики формируются людьми, представляющими разные культуры, 
идеологии и социальные образования. Рассматривая дискурсивные практики как часть линг-
вистической теории дискурса (дискурс-анализа), мы кратко опишем основные цели и прин-
ципы теории дискурса и выделим причины, по которым это направление превратилось в до-
минирующую лингвистическую парадигму нового тысячелетия. Кроме того, мы остановимся 
на развитии теории дискурса и тех дискуссионных вопросах, которые возникают в ее рамках. 
Проблемные зоны теории дискурса касаются расширения предметной области дискурс-ана-
лиза, избираемых дискурс-аналитиками объектов исследования, стыковых дисциплин, гра-
ничащих с теорией дискурса, и методологии анализа. В завершение мы дадим краткий обзор 
каждой статьи номера и отметим теоретический и методологический вклад, а также новизну 
каждой публикации. Результаты и перспективы будущих исследований очерчены в заключи-
тельной части вводной статьи.  
Ключевые слова: дискурс анализ, дискурсивные практики, культура, идеология, идентич-
ность  
 

Для цитирования: 
Bilá, Magdaléna and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Language, culture and ideology in discursive 
practices. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252. DOI: 10.22363/2687-0088-2020-
24-2-219-252 

 
To imagine a world without discourse is to 
imagine a world without language and 
therefore to imagine the unimaginable.  

(He 2003: 428) 
 

1. Introduction 
The focus of this issue is discourse and the way it is molded by homo loquens 

in different spheres of human activities. The authors of the issue throw light on how 
language, culture and ideology are intertwined in diverse discursive practices and 
how these practices are shaped by people representing various cultures, ideologies 
and social entities. This is not the first issue of our journal that is devoted to 
discourse and discursive practices (see issues 2006, 4; 2017, 1; 2018, 1; 2019, 4). 
But there is a certain reason why we continue this quest. Discourse is a cover term 
including all forms of language use, which makes discourse the only known real 
linguistic object (Kibrik 2009: 1). Notwithstanding the fact that many a book 
(Blommaert 2005, Fairclough 1992, 2003, Gee 2007, Johnstone 2018, Karasik 
2002, Schiffrin 1995, van Dijk 2006, 2009, 2011 and many more) is devoted to 
discourse, it has not lost its attraction to linguists due to several important reasons. 
It enables researchers to focus their effort on a human engaged in any kind of 
activity or interaction. In discourse studies speakers acquired diverse characteristics 
as biological, social, cultural, ethnic, professional beings and, as a consequence, the 
understanding of the significance of all types of environment in speech production 
led to the awareness of its formative role in the use of language at large. Discourse 
made it possible to ‘put language, action, interaction, values, beliefs, symbols, 
objects, tools, and places together in such a way that others recognize you as a 
particular type of who (identity) engaged in a particular type of what (activity), here 

220  



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

and now’ (Gee 1999: 27). Thus, le langage, the ethereal and insufficiently 
substantiated notion which was put forward by Saussure, became more tangible.  

2. Major tenets and objectives of discourse theory
For several decades, linguists had been concentrating their effort on the 

structure of language (Saussure’s la langue) until it became evident that linguistics 
could not stay within those rigorous borders (Yule 1999: 139—140). First the 
mesmerizing effect of language in use made scholars shift their attention to speech 
(Saussure’s parole). Then the combination of diverse factors, including the 
emergence of the term discourse in Harris’s work in 1952 (Harris 1952), 
Chomsky’s revolution in linguistics with his emphasis on competence vs. 
performance (Chomsky 1965), the study of discourse by French scholars (e.g. 
Foucault 1981, 1994), to name just a few — all led to an understanding of discourse 
as some kind of fabric produced by homo loquens (Hagege 1985) with two major 
interwoven threads, those of language and reality (Foucault 1994).  

A comprehensive study of discourse began with the scholars’ search for the 
universal definition of this phenomenon which is characterized by a complex and 
multidimensional nature. In this respect eight approaches to the definition of 
discourse outlined by Sériot (Seriot 1999) are still quite representative and 
expository, starting with the interpretation of discourse as an equivalent to 
Saussure’s parole and going to the conditions under which a certain text is 
generated, with all the restrictions set by the former (ibid.: 26—27). Eventually, 
discourse got its interpretation as a human activity aimed at creating some 
meaningful thought in a verbalized form. This approach brought to the fore the 
circumstances discourse is created in and the individual it is connected with. As a 
consequence, linguists turned to the study of an interplay of different factors that 
operate in discourse, shaping and molding it in the speaker’s mode. In the long run, 
a human being became the centerpiece of linguistic studies with discourse as the 
major manifestation of human activities and their multifarious relations. 

In the network of the relationships between humans, language and culture, 
humans are defined as biological, social and cultural beings with all these aspects 
closely bound together and constituting a single integral, inseparable package. 
Biological characteristics of humans determined by the evolution and genetic data 
are gradually transformed in the accommodation-assimilation processes and 
modified through social interaction and socialization, thus converting humans into 
social and cultural beings (Dolník 2015). The awareness that people as biological, 
social and cultural beings use language to mediate all their activities encouraged 
linguists to study language in various contexts, which they believed would help to 
untie that tight knot. The statement made by Nunan (1993) that “discourse brings 
together language, the individual producing the language, and the context within 
which the language is used” (1999: 6—7), is shared by all those who these days 
deal with discourse in linguistics. It is generally agreed that the term “discourse 
usually refers to the interpretation of the communicative event in context” (Dijk 

221 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

2009: 1). This makes context an essential concept in discourse analysis (Nefedov 
& Chernyavskaya 2020). Context as “a set of relevant properties of the 
communicative situations of verbal interaction” (Dijk 2009: vii) refers to the 
situation giving rise to discourse, and within which discourse is embedded. In this 
light discourse “refers to the set of norms, preferences, and expectations relating 
language to context, which language users draw on and modify in producing and 
making sense out of language in context” (Saville-Troike 1994: 358). 

Traditionally, linguists single out two different types of context. The first of 
these is linguistic or verbal context (also referred to as micro-context or co-text), 
i.e. the language that surrounds or accompanies a piece of discourse under analysis. 
The second is non-linguistic or non-verbal or experiential context within which 
discourse takes place (also referred to as macro-context). It is shaped by a number 
of factors including the type of communicative event (e.g. a joke, a story, a lecture, 
etc.); the topic; the purpose of the event; the setting; the participants and the 
relationships between them; and the background knowledge underlying the 
communicative event (Nunan 1993: 7—8). As Kecskes (2014) points out, in 
linguistics “contexts usually refer to any factor — linguistic, epistemic, physical, 
social — that affects the actual interpretation of signs and expressions” (Kecskes 
2014: 35). He suggests distinguishing between prior context which is in our mind 
(pragmatic context) and actual situational context, emphasizing that “meaning is 
the result of the interplay of prior experience and current, actual situational 
experience, which are both socio-cultural in nature” (ibid: 129). 

The use of language in a variety of contexts (situational, geographic, historical, 
structural, institutional), a discourse, is also understood as a three-dimensional 
concept (as text, discursive practice and social practice) (Fairclough 1992). As a 
social practice discourse is an entity embedded in social and historical context. 
What is more, it subsequently participates in the social construction of reality and 
is responsible for socially modeling a community and creating social identities, 
enhancing knowledge, shaping social relations and generating complex discursive 
practices and discourse conventions (Resta 1998, van Dijk 2006). 

Another important finding that came with discourse studies was the 
understanding of cognition and discourse closely tied together. It became clear that 
“discourse intervenes between thought and reality” (Williams 1999: 23). Within the 
cognitive framework of discourse theory, it is argued that humans mentally capture 
their environment and integrate it into concepts, systems and relationships, i.e. 
conceptualize it. Conceptualization can be understood as a mental grasp, 
segmentation, specification and categorization of data pertaining to the material and 
abstract world and subsequently processing it in thought and language. In individual 
lingua-cultural communities, these processes take place within specific 
interpretation frameworks governed by the internalized cultural patterns and 
conventions. Thus, in different cultures, people schematize their experience and 
knowledge of the world differently. As a result, languages differ on the basis of 
“accumulated declarative knowledge <...> and culturally conditioned schemes” 

222 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

(Kecskes & Papp 2000), in other words, languages are socially and culturally 
embedded entities. 

Discourse analysis became a dominant paradigm ranging over all the human 
sciences, an air du temps, in Sériot’s terms (Sériot 2012: 18). Researchers 
belonging to different linguistic schools tried to describe formal and functional 
features of the latter (Schiffrin 1995). Later on, a third dimension of the discourse 
was added, that was the description of topoi underlying its certain types 
(Dobrosklonskaya 2014: 182). Thus, discourse made an overwhelming object of 
analysis uniting the humanities in their search for semiotically expressed 
(Fairclough 2004: 225—226) social psychological, sociological, and 
anthropological patterns (Dijk 2009) of reproducing social identity. 

3. Modern challenges for discourse theory
Modern linguistic discourse studies develop in several directions 

predetermined by a complex nature of the phenomenon under scrutiny. Scholars 
have been trying to achieve more precision in defining the object and the subject 
matter of discourse theory. Besides, another challenge is elaborating reliable 
methods which could be used in linguistics to explore the sphere of analysis, to 
describe types of discourse and discursive practices engaged in order to maintain 
existing or emerging social relations.  

In compliance with the socio-philosophical understanding of discourse, 
initially, linguists turned to those spheres of communication where power and 
domination in society was consistently reproduced (van Dijk 2011: xvii). These 
were political (van Dijk 2006, Fairclough 1989), news (van Dijk 1988, Fowler 
1991), mass media (van Dijk 1985), and legal (Goodrich 1987) discourses. Very 
soon this list grew and linguists’ interest turned to such spheres as advertising (Cook 
1992), marketing (Skålén et al. 2008), medical (e.g. Good, Del Vecchio Good 1981, 
Locher 2017), classroom (e.g. Christie 2002), academic (e.g. Hyland 2009) 
discourses. All these types of discourse retain their scholarly significance, with the 
scope of research only widening when it comes to political (e.g. Beard 2000, 
Chilton 2004, Ponton 2016, Sheigal 2004, Solopova & Chudinov 2018,), mass 
media (e.g. Bell & Garett 1992, Dobrosklonskaya 2014, Dubrovskaya & 
Kozhemyakin 2016; Larina et al 2019, Macdonald 2003, Matheson 2005, 
Ozyumenko 2017, Talbot 2007), news (e.g. Bednarek 2006, Montgomery 2007), 
religious (e.g. Bobyreva 2007, Naydenova 2018, Wierzbicka 2018) and judicial / 
legal (e.g. Gotti & Williams. 2003, Dubrovskaya 2017) discourses. Moreover, 
linguists started reconnoitering new spheres, including Internet discourse (Crystal 
2010), entertainment / leisure and consumer discourse (e.g. Fullagar 2002, 
Molodychenko 2016), lifestyle discourse (e.g. Ivanova 2019, Molodychenko 2020), 
tourist discourse (e.g. Jaworski, Thurlow 2010), gender discourse (e.g. Mills 2003), 
sports discourse (e.g. Koshkarova 2019), gastronomic discourse (e.g. Olyanich 
2003), urban discourse (e.g. Leontovich 2019), green discourse (e.g. Alexander & 

223 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

Stibbe 2014) and many others. This all proves the statement made by Issers that the 
list of types of discourse can never be complete (Issers 2011: 227).  

The framework of discourse theory provided an important perspective for 
many objects of linguistic description. One of these new fields of discourse theory 
expansion became the study of emotions (e.g. Alba-Juez & Larina 2018, Mackenzie 
& Alba-Juez 2019, Shahovsky 2015, 2018; among many others). Linguists saw a 
link between emotions and certain contexts which generate “a multimodal discourse 
process, which permeates all linguistic levels but also manifests itself in non-verbal 
ways, presenting different stages and forms (influenced by variables such as 
pragmatic expectations or common-ground knowledge) according as the discursive 
situation and interaction changes and evolves” (Mackenzie & Laura Alba-Juez 
2019: 18). The discourse approach to emotion made it possible to show this 
phenomenon as a dynamic, discourse-pragmatic entity. This “emotional turn” 
inevitably caused some changes in the subject matter of discourse analysis — it 
went far beyond current knowledge of how a human being constructs their social 
identity in different types of interaction (e.g. Langlotz & Locher 2017, Larina et al 
2017).  

A salient field of exploration discourse analysis borders on is communication. 
What do spheres, types and forms of communication, on the one hand, and types of 
discourse, on the other —have in common and what are their distinctive features so 
that linguists could tell them apart? Interestingly, discourse analysis gave rise to a 
term that unites these two notions, i.e. a discursive practice. The scope of 
interpretation of this Foucauldian term ranges from “the production, distribution 
and consumption of texts” (Fairclough 1992: 5, 73, 2010) to “the practices (or 
operations) of discourses, meaning knowledge formations” without any reference 
to linguistic practices or language use (Bacchi & Bonham 2014: 173). In spite of 
this contradiction between scholars, the majority of linguists follow the “linguistic 
turn” according to which discursive practices are a linguistic reflection of social 
practices defined as “a relatively stabilised form of social activity” (Fairclough 
2001: 231). Therefore, scholars delve into the analysis of discursive practices as 
mechanisms of discursive construction of various types of relations, starting with 
power distribution and going into diverse types of communication. In this respect 
it is only logical that the study of discourse turned out to be closely connected with 
the study of communication with its various communication strategies. 

Another case of the extension of the discourse analysis field is incorporating 
the study of im/politeness strategies converting them into discursive practices. The 
discursive approach to politeness (Eelen 2001, Mills 2003, Watts 2003) gave a new 
impetus to the development of the theory of politeness, significantly widening its 
scope. The most important contributions of the discursive turn were “to remind us 
of the evaluative and situated nature of concepts such as impoliteness or politeness, 
the importance that emotions play in assessments and to argue for the link of 
identity construction with these processes of judging” (Locher & Larina 2019: 
875).The study of impoliteness also emerges from the discursive focus on language 

224 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

(e.g. Bousfield & Locher 2008, Culpeper 2011, Garcés-Conejos Blitvich & 
Sifianou 2019). As Culpepper (2011) rightly states, impoliteness is an important 
aspect of social life and it plays a central role in many discourses which are rarely 
described in detail (Culpeper 2011: xiii). Both politeness and impoliteness involve 
the study of particular communicative behaviour in social interaction with the focus 
on context (e.g. Bousfield 2008, Fernández-Amaya 2019). 

Within linguistics, discourse analysis posited another set of acute questions 
since it was necessary to fit in the new object of analysis and find its own niche in 
relation to traditional spheres of linguistic analysis. Discourse understood as a 
Gestalt-cognitive entity having a certain invariant model and characterized by 
prototypical properties, was confronted with the long-existing and well-established 
notions recognized by the scholarly community of linguists and philologists, in this 
case that of genre as ‘as a set of expectations that a reader acquires from his/her 
reading’, ‘a self-contained system with its own codes and conventions’ (Corbett 
2009: 287). There was an opinion that linguistics should shun the notion of genre 
and replace it by the term discourse. It took time to work out a balanced approach 
and make the terminology compatible. Now genre studies within discourse analysis 
(e.g. Dementyev 2016, Fuentes Rodríguez &  Álvarez-Benito 2016, Garcés-
Conejos Blitvich, 2010, Ivanova 2017) is a topical issue (Dijk 2009: 8). It should 
be understood that this seems to be not only a problem of terminology but also of 
what we, linguists, really work with when it comes to studying units larger than 
sentence, the embodiment of language in use. 

This broadening of the subject matter and diversification of the object of 
analysis brought about another challenge for linguists involved in discourse 
analysis, i.e. the choice of methods and the veritability of results they yield. 
Needless to say, the extent and the severity of the methodological problem are 
predetermined by the multidimensional nature of discourse and its status in the 
humanities. It is common knowledge that linguistic discourse analysis is an 
outcropping of discourse analysis in the humanities which emerged in the 1960s. 
Due to French structuralism discourse came into research as an object of sociology. 
Thus, it was first studied in social sciences with the help of sociological methods. 
It took linguistic discourse analysis some time to elaborate its own approach to 
research. The seminal publications (Jørgensen & Phillips 2002, Titscher et al. 2000) 
made quite a step in this respect expounding a whole array of methods which could 
be employed by discourse analysts.  

Another difficulty with methodology stems from the inter- or even 
transdisciplinary status of discourse analysis. The focus of discourse theory or 
discourse analysis on language, society and a human being requires research within 
overlapping boundaries of different research fields. It brings in interdisciplinary 
methods and interdisciplinary teams to work on the problems put to the fore. 
Interdiciplinarity has always been an integral tenet of discourse analysis, critical 
discourse analysis (CDA) or critical discourse studies (CDS). Unger (2016) finds 
this approach as the manifestation of linguistic scholars’ natural need to cross “the 

  225 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

sometimes staid and rigid disciplinary boundaries of linguistics” (Unger 2016: 2). 
This approach is taken at theoretical, methodological and research context levels in 
that discourse analysis or CDS draws on other fields of inquiry (such as sociology, 
psychology, cognitive science, philosophy, etc.), makes use of methodologies also 
applied in different fields (text linguistics, corpus linguistics, ethnography, etc.) and 
explores all kinds of phenomena which share an affinity with the use of language. 
As a proponent of interdisciplinarity, he claims that “looking sideways” may be 
beneficial for discourse analysts in making an effort to incorporate theories from 
different disciplines into their analysis in order to better grasp discursive practices 
in their social contexts (Unger 2016: 2). In his analysis of diverse CDS approaches, 
Unger (2016) observes that they are aligned to three dimensions, namely textual, 
social and cognitive/mental. These dimensions are interrelated and involved in each 
approach, though to varying degrees, thus laying varied emphasis on investigating 
and clarifying phenomena that are respectively textual, social or cognitive/mental.  

All these problems have been actively discussed in the framework of discourse 
theory and scholarly fields adjacent to it. In the recent years, more often than before, 
scholarly publishing on the problems of discourse theory has significantly expanded 
in volume and the number of conferences on this topical issue has been only 
increasing. The idea of this issue was born at “Language in Modern Discursive 
Practices”, within the Firsova Readings — IV, a traditional biannual conference 
that was held on October 22—23, 2019 at the RUDN University supported by the 
Institute of modern languages, intercultural communication and migrations. The 
international team of plenary speakers — Miriam A. Locher (University of Basel, 
Switzerland), Laura Alba-Juez (UNED, Madrid), Magdaléna Bilá and Ingrida 
Vaňková (University of Prešov, Slovakia), Dániel Z. Kádár (Hungarian Academy 
of Sciences & Dalian University of Foreign Languages), Monika Kopytowska 
(Lodz University, Poland) — covered many of the problems addressed in this issue. 
The reports presented showed that discursive practices are being researched in 
different types of discourse and they could be analyzed from different perspectives: 
the way they are employed to express emotions, politeness and impoliteness, hate 
speech, etc. 

4. Issues covered in the collection
This issue is coming out in hard times and we are thankful to everyone who, at 

this difficult time of corona virus pandemic, continues to work and share their 
thoughts and ideas, including those related to challenges that go beyond the field of 
linguistics. The issue opens with Anna Wierzbicka’s address to all of us united in 
our fight against the pandemic which acquired the shape of a global social event, 
with seven essential messages. Using her Natural Semantic Metalanguage method, 
which allows thoughts to be accurately conveyed in all languages of the world 
(Goddard and Wierzbicka 20014, Wierzbicka 1996), Anna Wierzbicka has found 
simple, transparent words — words that can be understood and taken in 
instantaneously, by anyone. We can only hope that these words can help us cope 

226 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

with the hardships and difficulties of this period, find new prospects and stay 
positive. 

All the works presented on the pages of the special issue focus on the analysis 
of discursive practices. Studying different angles of the language, culture and 
ideology interaction through the prism of discourse, the authors thereby expand and 
refine our knowledge about the processes of social life occurring at the micro and 
macro levels. The basis for research of this kind stems from the idea that discourse 
“involves focusing upon a social construction of meaning” (Williams 1999: 5).  

Anna Wierzbicka’s address is followed by her article “Addressing God in 
European languages: Different meanings, different cultural attitudes” in which she 
investigates how speakers of different European languages tend to relate to God. 
The aim the author sets complies with an understanding that as cultural beings, 
humans manifest themselves through standardized manners of accommodative 
behavior. In the course of socialization, humans develop a variety of (verbal) 
behavior patterns and various modes of interpreting the world, which results in the 
emergence of an array of lingua-cultural communities (Dolník 2015). The 
relationship between humans, language and culture has been the focus of research 
in humanities from the very beginning. This interest has been an ongoing feature of 
modern linguistics for quite a while and it reveals the way language is used to serve 
its purpose according to the aim of the user, the context of use and the internalized 
cultural patterns governing its mechanisms. Thus, each lingua-culture has their own 
characteristic ways of addressing God, encoded in certain words, phrases, 
grammatical forms, and formulae which both reflect and shape the speakers’ 
habitual ways of thinking about God and relating to God. Often, they also reflect 
some other aspects of their cultural memory and historical experience. The results 
of the study show that each European language offers its users a range of options 
for addressing God. Some of these options are shared; others appear to be unique 
to the language. All are underpinned by broader historical phenomena. Still as the 
author maintains, the exact nature of all these links remains to be investigated. 

During socialization, people develop different (verbal) patterns of behavior 
and different ways of interpreting the world, which leads to the emergence of many 
language communities (Dolník 2015). The next three articles of the current issue 
examine the relationship between ideology, identity and language in various 
discursive practices in different language communities. Ideologies represent social 
groups, define and are defined by their social practices.  

Language is all around us, permeating our public and private lives, 
materialized in the form of speech sounds and displayed in texts taking the form of 
shop signs, public and private notices, posters, commercial slogans, etc. Martin 
Pütz explores the linguistic landscape of Cameroon sharing his reflections on 
language policy and ideology. He dwells on linguistic landscape as a relatively 
recent area of research, which he defines as the visual representation of languages 
in public space. Cameroon’s linguistic landscape is composed of English, French, 
Pidgin English, Camfranglais and, to a minor degree, indigenous African 

  227 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

languages. This paper shows that the field of linguistic landscapes can act as a 
reflection of linguistic hierarchies, ideologies and acts of resistance in multilingual 
and multicultural communities. Besides, in Cameroon the linguistic landscape 
almost exclusively focuses on the dominant status and role of one single language, 
i.e. French, and to a lesser extent English, whose speakers therefore feel 
marginalized and oppressed by the French-favouring government. The paper 
presents certain interest from the point of view of its methodology as the author 
analyses more than 600 linguistic tokens (digital photos) that he collected in various 
public places mainly in and around the Cameroonian capital of Yaoundé. 

Stephany Moody and Zohreh Eslami turn to political discourse, code-
switching and ideology. The authors concentrate on mechanisms of manipulation, 
suggestion, and persuasion inherent in language. They study code-switching in 
political discourse, which is considered as one of the discursive practices employed 
by bi- and multilinguals. Through these practices, they utilize their entire linguistic 
repertoires to create meaning by way of switching between two or more available 
languages or dialects with respect to certain extralinguistic factors to gain support 
of their political followers. Code-switching captures the historical, political and 
social embeddedness of language practices and the manners in which these 
practices are intertwined with ideologies. Based on language ideologies framework, 
the paper seeks to determine how code-switching was used as political discourse by 
Senator Kaine, and how its use varied based on the context of each speech. The 
study illustrates how code-switching can be used to cultivate political favour, forge 
alliances, and demonstrate cultural similarities between white politicians and bi- 
and multilingual voters. 

In their paper, Magdaléna Bilá, Alena Kačmárová and Ingrida Vaňková 
address the encounter of two lingua-cultures through the perspective of social 
deixis. It is a well-known fact that in most languages, mainly European ones, 
conveying social deixis operates on a sliding scale between two extremes:  
T and V forms. The paper reports on research on Slovak and English languages that 
respectively have and lack overt T/V markers. The uniqueness of English vs. Slovak 
cultural identity and/or discursive practice of the respective culture with regard to 
expressing social distance are examined in two steps. Firstly, the related concepts 
(a cultural identity, social distance, T/V forms) are analyzed by means of the 
conceptualizing scheme (frame establishment, encoding/pre-understanding, 
contextualization/salience, and code configuration). Secondly, the questionnaires 
were designed based on the outcomes of the conceptualization process involving a 
set of principles. The outcomes of the investigation show that conceptualization of 
T vs V or informal vs. formal may stem from the conceptualization of social 
distance in terms of a set of principles, the conceptualization of the specific 
principle in terms of the relationship types, the conceptualization of the relationship 
type in terms of a specific culture and the conceptualization of a culture-specific 
relationship type through language means (T or V).  

228  



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

Various discursive practices are discussed in a number of articles. Natalia 
Sokolova brings to the fore some methodological questions in her integrated 
approach investigation analyses of multimodal marketing discourse. The paper 
investigates the multimodal website marketing discourse relying on an approach 
which makes use of multimodal critical discourse analysis, pragmatics, and text 
linguistics. The integrated framework allows for consideration of the discourse-
generating intention of the locutionary source, the discourse function, verbal 
content categories and audio-visual techniques employed in the nonverbal discourse 
contributing to the global category of ideologeme made of key ideas and aimed at 
the locutionary target. It is of particular interest that the linguistic means in the three 
marketing discourses under analysis are different only when it comes to 
metaphorical expressions. The global ideologeme is made explicit by urging 
customers to optimize data and feel IT-powered performance benefits. It is 
conveyed through multiple antitheses, such as data challenges vs. one solution, 
previously vs. now, old vs. new and slowly vs. fast. The antitheses in the three 
marketing discourses are similar as are the typical manifestations of categories and 
audio-visual techniques which may encourage further research in terms of making 
the specific discourse of a company stand out to its customers. 

Svetlana Ivanova and Gulnara Khakimova investigate celebrity gossip as a 
genre in English-language mass media discourse. The paper studies rumours as a 
specific communication phenomenon and the discursive practices by means of 
which it is realized across the Anglophone mass media discourse continuum. The 
integrative approach with various methods employed makes it possible to gain an 
insight into media rumours, namely celebrity gossip, manifested in on-line versions 
of the printed press and original web outlets. The study reveals restrictions imposed 
on this text type and the range of topics discussed, i.e. what makes this genre distinct 
from others. The structure of the celebrity gossip discourse is represented by texts 
in different journalistic forms: ranging from informative genres to feature type 
variations used by authors as means of constructing celebrity culture. The 
information of trivial content and questionable validity because of its unverified 
character is disguised as reports of high testimonial trustworthiness and epistemic 
value with the help of a variety of language and textual resources. The authors argue 
that within the mass media communication there exists a specific discourse which 
is hybrid by nature and non-evidential by verification. 

Aleksey Romanov and Olga Novoselova unveil pragmatic effectiveness of 
threat statements in political communication. The aim of the article is to consider 
pre-election statements with the meaning of threat as verbal regulative actions and 
to propose a typology of such constructive menacives taking into account the 
targeted orientation of their consequent component. The theoretical framework of 
the study is made up by the theory of speech activity, speech act theory and 
psychosemantics. The study identified 18 targeted types of menacives from the 
point of view of their pragmatic and emotional potential for influencing voters 
which are characterized by different frequencies in pre-election programs. The 

  229 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

authors conclude that politicians deliberately prefer to use threat statements with 
consequent effect on an unfocused audience trying to win the attention and votes. 
The analysis shows that four types of threat statements with different targeting of 
consequent component was a pragmatically effective tool in the context of the 
Russian pre-election campaign in 2018. The results of this study can be used to 
predict the pragmatic effect of politicians’ threat statements on voters. 

Sergey Pashkov in his work accentuates the importance of the holistic view 
of the world that is relevant for text studies. The purpose of the article is to analyze 
and classify the language means representing emotions which biblical characters 
attribute to God. On the basis of theological interpretation of the antinomy ‘God’s 
immutability-God’s emotions’ the author substantiates (1) the introduction of the 
term ‘attribution of emotions’ in the conceptual and terminological apparatus of 
emotiology explicating the specificity of biblical emotive meanings; (2) the analysis 
of the depicted biblical space in the emotive aspect; (3) the interpretation of biblical 
characters’ activity as a cause of emotions attributed to God. The language analysis 
is carried out with the help of the notion of the emotional script. This notion helps 
to present the systemic description of emotion development that is the cause of its 
emergence and the corresponding response. The methodological approaches 
employed in the study include the definitional, contextual, emotive, and lingua-
stylistic analyses, with reference to the historical and cultural context. The study 
results in classifying the following types of lexemes: 1) representing the cause of 
emotions attributed to God; 2) representing emotions attributed to God; 
3) representing the biblical space perceived by characters as a ‘reaction’ to 
emotions attributed to God. Proceeding from the theandric nature of Jesus Christ, 
His depicted emotions are treated as a manifestation of His human nature. The study 
has allowed the author to give linguistic substance to one of the antinomies of 
Christian understanding of God and to project a new prospect of further linguistic 
research on Christian dogmata from an emotive perspective. 

It is only logical that the conclusive contribution by Lara Sinelnikova puts the 
final touch to the questions discussed. Lara Sinelnikova’s contribution delves into 
the conceptual environment of the frontier discourse in the humanities and, thus, 
finalizes the discussion of the problems touched upon in the current issue. The 
author argues that frontier concept has been familiar to scholars for a long time and 
its main characteristics, including its flexible borders, its conceptualization as a 
zone of space development characterized by uncertainty and instability, proved 
their importance for understanding and describing the current state of the 
environment in its social, cultural, communicative and linguistic indicators. The 
interdisciplinary (transcendental) potential of a frontier is realized in a 
complementary combination of natural sciences and humanities. The author aims 
at justifying the scientific integrity of the term ‘frontier discourse’, whose 
conceptual environment is created through two overlapping multi-layer 
phenomena: frontier and discourse. The article names the vectors of expanding the 
interdisciplinary potential of frontier under the conditions of a discourse approach. 

230  



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

Frontier as a flexible border is presented in the internet communication, the socio-
cultural space of the modern city, in the daily behavioural norms of the elite, in the 
in-family relations and in many other conceptual spheres, whose list remains open 
due to the ontological features of the concept in question. Based on the examples 
from literature, the author demonstrates the role of the frontier modus in the 
interpretation of literary texts, whose plot, style and images are projected onto 
national history, culture, mentality in their by-border characteristics. Such frontier 
features as instability, its ability to create an interaction zone, which, under certain 
conditions, can lead to integration, are important for understanding the problems of 
modern language, speech and genre norms. The by-border territory is a place of 
accumulating violations of traditional norms and the material necessary to forecast 
the arising norm changes. The transformation of traditional genres and the 
formation of new ones also take place on the frontier territories. It is concluded that 
frontier discourse ensures the understanding of norm shifts in genre-stylistic 
characteristics. 

The current volume contains two reviews on the issues closely connected with 
the topic under study. Etsuko Oishi reviews the book edited by well-known 
scholars of the theory of politeness and impoliteness Jonathan Culpeper, Michael 
Haugh and Dániel Z. Kádár (2017) The Palgrave Handbook of Linguistic 
(Im)politeness. In her review she underscores a desired balance between theory and 
application which is achieved by the contributors. The book unfolds the concept of 
impoliteness and brings a new perspective to the (im)politeness research: 
impoliteness as well as politeness manifests as facework strategies achieved 
discursively.  

Marianna Ryshina-Pankova reviews the book edited by two prominent 
researchers of discourse and emotions J. Lachlan Mackenzie and Laura Alba-Juez 
(2019) Emotion in Discourse. This collection of articles instantiates what has been 
called the “emotional turn” in the human sciences and specifically in the study of 
language (see also Alba-Juez & Larina, 2018, a special issue of this journal devoted 
to this theme). The volume focuses on the crucial importance of emotion in human 
communication and on the construal of emotions through language. Presenting the 
latest theoretical and empirical research on this matter, the book aims to provide a 
detailed account of the interaction of emotion, language, language proficiency, 
culture, and discourse. 

 
5. Discussion and outlook 

The emergence of discourse analysis stems from the idea to explore a human 
being in their social environment. “Discourse analytical approaches take as their 
starting point the claim of structuralist and poststructuralist linguistic philosophy, 
that our access to reality is always through language” (Jørgensen & Phillips 2002: 
8). With discourse analysis prescriptive and normative linguistics yielded its way 
to investigating language in use as the main prerogative and indisputable priority of 
linguistic studies. This paradigm has not exhausted itself; it still has a lot to explore 

  231 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

to answer the eternal question of linguistics, how the human language functions 
when a human being uses it to achieve certain communicative aims. The current 
issue testifies that “discourse analysis is in constant evolution, and continues to 
expand in the range and scope of its research activities” (Ponton & Larina 2017: 
12) and we cannot but agree more. Linguists are still elaborating and substantiating 
a full integrative framework of the theory of discourse with many variables falling 
into the picture.  

 
RU	

 
Представить себе мир без дискурса — это 
все равно, что представить себе мир без 
языка, то есть представить что-то невооб-
разимое.1  

(He 2003: 428) 
 

1. Введение 
В центре внимания этого выпуска — дискурс и то, как homo loquens, че-

ловек говорящий, выстраивает его в различных сферах человеческой деятель-
ности. Авторы выпуска отвечают на вопрос о том, как язык, культура и идео-
логия переплетаются в различных дискурсивных практиках и как эти прак-
тики формируются людьми, представляющими разные культуры, идеологии 
и социальные образования. Это не первый выпуск нашего журнала, посвя-
щенный дискурсу и дискурсивным практикам (см. Выпуски 2006, 4; 2017, 1; 
2018, 1; 2019, 4), и на это есть веская причина. Дискурс — это явление, вклю-
чающее все формы использования языка, что, собственно, и делает его един-
ственным известным реальным лингвистическим объектом (Кибрик 2009: 1). 
Несмотря на то, что дискурсу посвящены многочисленные издания (Карасик 
2002, Blommaert 2005, Fairclough 1992, 2003, Gee 2007, Johnstone 2018, 
Kalyango Jr. & Kopytowska 2014, Schiffrin 1995, van Dijk 2006, 2009, 2011 и 
многие др.), он не теряет своей привлекательности для лингвистов по ряду 
важных обстоятельств. Дискурс позволяет исследователям сосредоточить 
свои усилия на человеке, вовлеченном в любой вид деятельности или взаимо-
действия. Прежде всего, в дискурсивных исследованиях говорящие приобре-
тают “осязаемость” и конкретность как биологические, социальные, культур-
ные, этнические, профессиональные идентичности. Как следствие, понима-
ние значимости всех типов окружения, которые участвуют в производстве 
речи, привело к осознанию созидающей роли экстралингвистических факто-
ров в использовании языка в целом. Дискурс позволил объединить «язык, 
действие, взаимодействие, ценности, убеждения, символы, объекты, инстру-
менты и местопребывание таким образом, чтобы другие распознавали вас как 
особый тип того, кто (идентичность) участвовал в определенном типе того, 
                                                            

1 Здесь и далее перевод наш (М.Б., С.И.) 

232  



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

что (деятельность), здесь и сейчас происходит» (Gee 1999: 27). Таким обра-
зом, le langage, эфемерное и требующее большего обоснования понятие, вы-
двинутое Ф. де Соссюром, приобрело наполненность и необходимую для 
лингвиста реальность. 

 
2. Основные принципы и цели теории дискурса 

В течение нескольких десятилетий лингвисты сосредоточивали свои уси-
лия на структуре языка (la langue, по Соссюру), пока не стал очевидным тот 
факт, что лингвистика не может оставаться в этих жестких границах (Yule 
1999: 139—140). Сначала завораживающий эффект языка в его функциониро-
вании (language in use) заставил ученых переключить свое внимание на речь 
(la parole, по Соссюру). Затем совокупность различных факторов, в том числе 
появление термина «дискурс» в работе Зеллига Харриса в 1952 году (Harris 
1952), революция Хомского в лингвистике с его акцентом на competence vs 
performance (Chomsky 1965), изучение дискурса французскими учеными 
(Foucault 1981, 1994), и это далеко не полный перечень движущих лингви-
стику XX в. сил — привело к пониманию дискурса как результата теснейшего 
взаимодействия двух миров — языка и реальности (Foucault 1994), которые 
оказываются опосредованными деятельностью человека говорящего (Hagege 
1985). 

Всестороннее изучение дискурса началось с поиска учеными универсаль-
ного определения этого сложного и многомерного по своей природе явления. 
В этом отношении восемь подходов к определению дискурса, изложенных 
П. Серио (Серио 1999: 25—27), все еще актуальны и обладают объясняющей 
силой — начиная с интерпретации дискурса как эквивалента соссюровского 
la parole и включая формулировку, содержащую все дискурсно-обусловлен-
ные ограничения на порождение текста (там же: 26—27). В конечном итоге 
интерпретация дискурса предполагает деятельность человека, направленную 
на создание мысли в словесной форме. При таком подходе на первый план 
выходят обстоятельства бытования дискурса и индивид, бытующий в этом 
дискурсе и/или связанный с ним. Как следствие, интерес вызывает изучение 
разнообразных факторов, которые взаимодействуют в рамках дискурса, фор-
мируя и форматируя его по образу и образцу говорящего. Именно человек 
стал центром лингвистической теории дискурса, при этом дискурс понима-
ется как основное проявление человека в рамках производимой им деятель-
ности и в совокупности со всеми отношениями, которые в этой деятельности 
возникают. Взаимоотношения между людьми, языком и культурой опреде-
ляют человека как существо биологическое, социальное и культурное. При 
этом все эти ипостаси человека тесно связаны друг с другом и составляют 
единое нераздельное целое. Биологические характеристики людей, определя-
емые эволюцией и генетическими данными, постепенно трансформируются в 
процессы аккомодации и ассимиляции и изменяются посредством социаль-

  233 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

ного взаимодействия и социализации, превращая людей в социальные и куль-
турные идентичности (Dolník 2015). Осознание того, что люди как биологи-
ческие, социальные и культурные существа используют язык в качестве по-
средника во всей своей деятельности, побуждает лингвистов изучать язык в 
различных контекстах, что, по их мнению, поможет развязать этот гордиев 
узел. Заявление Дэвида Нунана (Nunan 1993) о том, что «дискурс объединяет 
язык, человека, производящего язык, и контекст, в котором этот язык исполь-
зуется» (Nunan 1993: 6—7), разделяют все дискурсологи. Исследователи схо-
дятся во мнении, что термин «дискурс» используется при интерпретации ком-
муникативного события в контексте (Dijk 2009: 1). Таким образом контекст 
приобретает концептуальное значение для дискурсивного анализа (Нефедов, 
Чернявская 2020). Контекст как «набор соответствующих свойств коммуни-
кативных ситуаций речевого взаимодействия» (Dijk 2009: VII) относится к 
ситуации порождения и бытования дискурса. В свете этого понимания дис-
курс «относится к набору норм, предпочтений и ожиданий, который пользо-
ватели языка имеют в своем распоряжении и изменяют при создании и осмыс-
лении языка в контексте» (Saville-Troike 1994: 358). 

Традиционно лингвисты выделяют два типа контекста. Первым из них 
является языковой или словесный контекст (также называемый микроконтек-
стом или со-текстом), то есть язык, который окружает или сопровождает ана-
лизируемый фрагмент дискурса. Второй — это неязыковой, невербальный 
или эмпирический контекст (также называемый макроконтекстом), в котором 
дискурс «происходит». Он испытывает формирующее влияние ряда факто-
ров, включающих тип коммуникативного события (например, шутка, рассказ, 
лекция и т.д.), тему, цель события, окружение, участников и отношения 
между ними, а также фоновые знания, лежащие в основе коммуникативного 
события (Nunan 1993: 7—8). Как указывает И. Кечкеш (Kecskes 2014), в линг-
вистике «контексты обычно относятся к любому из факторов — лингвисти-
ческому, эпистемологическому, физическому, социальному, которые влияют 
на фактическую интерпретацию знаков и выражений» (Kecskes 2014: 35). Он 
предлагает различать предшествующий контекст (prior context), который 
находится в нашем сознании, и фактический ситуативный контекст, подчер-
кивая при этом, что «значение является результатом взаимодействия предше-
ствующего опыта и текущего, фактического ситуативного опыта, и оба имеют 
социокультурный характер» (там же: 129).  

Дискурс как использование языка в различных контекстах (ситуативный, 
географический, исторический, структурный, институциональный) также 
толкуется как трехмерное образование (текст, дискурсивная практика и соци-
альная практика) (Fairclough 1992). Как социальная практика дискурс пред-
ставляет собой сущность, встроенную в социальный и исторический кон-
текст. Более того, впоследствии он участвует в социальном конструировании 
реальности и отвечает за социальное моделирование сообщества и создание 
социальных идентичностей, расширение знаний, формирование социальных 

234  



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

отношений и создание сложных дискурсивных практик и дискурсивных кон-
венций (Resta 1998, van Dijk 2006). 

Другим важным открытием, которое пришло с исследованиями дискурса, 
стало понимание тесной связи познания и дискурса. Стало ясно, что дискурс 
существует между мыслью и реальностью (Williams 1999: 23). Когнитивное 
прочтение теории дискурса предполагает, что люди мысленно «схватывают» 
окружающее их пространство со всеми отношениями и интегрируют все это 
вместе взятое в концепции, системы и отношения, то есть производят опера-
цию концептуализации. Концептуализация может пониматься как восприя-
тие, сегментация, спецификация и категоризация данных, относящихся к ма-
териальному и абстрактному миру, и последующая обработка их в мышлении 
и на языке. В отдельных лингвокультурных сообществах эти процессы про-
исходят в определенных интерпретационных рамках, регулируемых интерна-
лизованными культурными закономерностями и соглашениями. Таким обра-
зом, в разных культурах люди по-разному схематизируют свой опыт и знания 
о мире. В результате языки различаются по «накопленным декларативным 
знаниям <...> и культурно-обусловленным схемам» (Kecskes & Papp, 2000), 
иными словами, языки становятся и являются социально и культурно встро-
енными объектами. 

Не будет преувеличением сказать, что к началу XXI века дискурс-анализ 
стал доминирующей парадигмой, охватывающей все гуманитарные науки, 
своеобразным духом времени, air du temps, в терминах Патрика Серио (Sériot 
2012: 18). Представители разных лингвистических школ пытались описать 
формальные и функциональные особенности дискурса (Schiffrin 1994). Позже 
к этим двум добавилось третье измерение дискурса, а именно описание топо-
сов, лежащих в основе определенных типов дискурса (Добросклонская 2014: 
182). Таким образом, дискурс стал объектом анализа, объединяющим гумани-
тарные науки в их поисках семиотически выраженных (Fairclough 2004: 225—
226), социально-психологических, социологических, антропологических мо-
делей (Dijk 2009) воспроизведения социальной идентичности. 

 
3. Современные вызовы теории дискурса 

Современные исследования лингвистического дискурса развиваются в 
нескольких направлениях, что обусловлено сложным характером изучаемого 
явления. Ученые пытаются достичь большей точности в определении объекта 
и предмета теории дискурса. Еще одной проблемой является разработка 
надежных методов анализа, которые могут быть использованы в лингвистике 
для изучения данной предметной области, для описания типов дискурса и 
дискурсивных практик, востребованных для поддержания существующих 
или возникающих социальных отношений. 

В соответствии с социально-философским пониманием дискурса перво-
начально лингвисты обратились к тем сферам общения, в которых осуществ-
ляется постоянное воспроизводство власти и господства в обществе (van Dijk 

  235 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

2011: xvii). Это были политический дискурс (van Dijk 2006, Fairclough 1989), 
новостной (Fowler 1991, van Dijk 1988), дискурс масс медиа (van Dijk 1985), 
юридический дискурс (Goodrich 1987). Очень скоро перечень дискурсов, ко-
торые исследовали лингвисты, вырос, и его дополнили рекламный (Cook 
1992), маркетинговый (Skålén et al. 2008,), медицинский (Good, DelVecchio 
Good 1981, Locher 2017), учебный (Christie 2002), академический (Hyland 
2009) дискурсы. Все эти типы дискурса остаются в поле внимания исследова-
телей, причем объем работ только увеличивается, когда дело доходит до по-
литического (например, Beard 2000, Chilton 2004, Ponton 2016, Солопова,  
Чудинов 2018, Шейгал 2004), массмедийного (например, Добросклонская 
2014, Озюменко 2017, Bell & Garett 1992, Dubrovskaya, Kozhemyakin 2016, 
Larina, Ozyumenko, Ponton 2019, Matheson 2005, Talbot 2007), новостного 
(Bednarek 2006, Montgomery 2007), юридического / судебного (например, 
Дубровская 2017, Gotti & Williams 2003), религиозного (например, Бобырева 
2007, Найденова 2018, Wierzbicka 2018). Более того, дискурс-анализу подвер-
гаются новые области человеческой деятельности — в данном случае речь 
идет о таких типах дискурса, как интернет-дискурс (Crystal 2010), дискурс 
развлекательный / досуговый, именуемый также консьюмеристским (Fullagar 
2002, Молодыченко 2016), лайфстайл-дискурс (Иванова 2019, Молодыченко 
2020), туристический дискурс (Jaworski, Thurlow 2010), гендерный дискурс 
(Mills 2003), спортивный дискурс (Кошкарова 2019), гастрономический дис-
курс (Олянич 2003), урбанистический (Леонтович 2019) и многие другие. Все 
это свидетельствует в пользу утверждения О.С. Иссерс о том, что составить 
полный список типов дискурсов не представляется возможным (Иссерс 2011: 
227). Более того, исследователи отмечают тенденцию к интеграции и гибри-
дизации дискурсов (Иванова 2017). 

Теория дискурса стала перспективной основой для многих направлений 
лингвистического анализа. Одной из этих новых областей, которые подверг-
лись экспансии теории дискурса, стало изучение эмоций (например, Шахов-
ский 2015, 2018, Alba-Juez & Larina 2018, Mackenzie & Alba-Juez 2019 и мно-
гие другие). Лингвисты увидели связь между эмоциями и определенными ти-
пами контекста, порождающими «процесс мультимодального дискурса, кото-
рый пронизывает все уровни языка, но также проявляется в невербальных 
способах, представляя различные стадии и формы (под влиянием таких пере-
менных, как прагматические ожидания или общие знания), по мере того, как 
дискурсивная ситуация и взаимодействие изменяются и развиваются» 
(Mackenzie & Alba-Juez 2019: 18). Дискурсивный подход к эмоциям позволил 
показать это явление как динамическую, дискурсивно-прагматическую сущ-
ность. Этот «эмоциональный поворот» неизбежно вызвал некоторые измене-
ния предметной области дискурс-анализа — убеждение перестало быть опре-
деляющим фактором для определения объекта исследования теории дис-
курса, дискурс способствует пониманию того, как человек конструирует свою 

236  



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

социальную идентичность в различных типах взаимодействия (e.g. Langlotz 
& Locher 2017, Larina et al 2017 и др.). 

Важной областью исследований, граничащей с анализом дискурса, явля-
ется коммуникация. Сферы, типы и формы общения, с одной стороны, и типы 
дискурса, с другой — что у них общего и каковы их отличительные особен-
ности? Интересно, что дискурсивный анализ породил термин, который объ-
единяет эти два понятия: речь идет о дискурсивной практике. Диапазон ин-
терпретации этого термина, восходящего к работам М. Фуко (Foucault 1981), 
варьируется от «производства, распространения и потребления текстов» 
(Fairclough 1992: 5, 73, 2010) до «практик (или операций) дискурсов, означа-
ющих накопление знаний» без какой-либо ссылки на лингвистические прак-
тики или использование языка (Bacchi & Bonham 2014: 173). Несмотря на это 
противоречие, большинство лингвистов следуют «лингвистическому пово-
роту», согласно которому дискурсивные практики являются лингвистиче-
ским отражением социальных практик, определяемых как «относительно ста-
билизированная форма социальной активности» (Fairclough 2001: 231). По-
этому ученые подходят к рассмотрению дискурсивных практик как механиз-
мов дискурсивного построения различных типов отношений, начиная с рас-
пределения власти и включая разнообразные типы коммуникации. Таким об-
разом, изучение дискурса оказалось тесно связанным с изучением общения и 
его различных коммуникационных стратегий. 

Еще одна область расширения области дискурс-анализа — это изучение 
стратегий не / вежливости, превращающих их в дискурсивные практики. Дис-
курсивный подход к вежливости (Eelen 2001, Watts 2003, Mills 2003) дал но-
вый импульс развитию теории вежливости, значительно расширив ее диапа-
зон. Наибольшая значимость дискурсивного поворота заключалась в том, 
чтобы «напомнить нам об оценочном и относительном характере таких поня-
тий, как невежливость или вежливость, о важности, которую эмоции играют 
в оценках, и сделать вывод о связи конструирования идентичности с этими 
процессами оценки» (Locher & Larina 2019: 875). Изучение невежливости 
также вытекает из дискурсивного подхода к языку (например, Bousfield 2008, 
Bousfield & Locher 2008, Culpeper 2011, Garcés-Conejos Blitvich & Sifianou 
2019). Как справедливо утверждает Калпепер (Culpepper 2011), невежливость 
является важным аспектом социальной жизни и играет центральную роль во 
многих дискурсах, которые редко описываются подробно (Culpeper 2011: 
xiii). Как вежливость, так и невежливость включают изучение конкретного 
коммуникативного поведения в социальном взаимодействии с акцентом на 
контекст (например, Bousfield 2008, Fernández-Amaya 2019). 

Помимо перечисленных проблемных зон, необходимо обратиться к еще 
одному вопросу, который связан с проблемой определения места дискурса по 
отношению к традиционным сферам лингвистического анализа. Дискурс, по-
нимаемый как когнитивная сущность на уровне гештальта (поскольку для 

  237 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

него присуща некая инвариантная модель и его характеризуют прототипиче-
ские свойства), должен найти свое место по отношению к давно существую-
щим и устоявшимся в лингвистической науке понятиям. Так, неоднократно 
поднимался вопрос о взаимоотношении дискурса и жанра как набора ожида-
ний, которые выстраивает зрелый читатель, как некоей автономной системы 
со своими собственными кодексами и конвенциями (Corbett 2009: 287). 
В ходе данной дискуссии звучали голоса о том, что лингвистика должна из-
бавиться от понятия «жанр» и заменить его термином «дискурс». Потребова-
лось время, чтобы выработать сбалансированный подход к решению о совме-
стимости данных терминов. В настоящее время актуальность жанровых ис-
следований в рамках дискурс-анализа (например, Дементьев 2016, Иванова 
2017, Cap & Okulska 2013, Fuentes Rodríguez & Álvarez-Benito 2016, Garcés-
Conejos Blitvich, 2010) не вызывает сомнений (Dijk 2009: 8). При этом необ-
ходимо отдавать себе отчет в том, что эта, казалось бы, всего лишь термино-
логическая проблема отражает трудности изучения единиц, превышающих 
предложение и относящихся к описанию речи и речевой деятельности. 

Расширение предмета и диверсификация объекта анализа поставили пе-
ред лингвистами, занимающимися теорией дискурса, еще одну проблему, ка-
сающуюся выбора методов и доказательства достоверности полученных ре-
зультатов. Нет необходимости говорить, что степень остроты и серьезность 
проблемы методологии обусловлены многомерностью дискурса и его особым 
статусом в гуманитарных науках. Общеизвестно, что лингвистическая теория 
дискурса стала развитием идей дискурс-анализа, которые совершили прорыв 
в гуманитарных науках в 1960-е годы. Благодаря французскому структура-
лизму дискурс вошел в научно-исследовательскую практику как объект со-
циологии. Совершенно естественно, что первоначально к анализу дискурса 
применялись социологические методы. Лингвистической теории дискурса 
потребовалось время, чтобы выработать свой собственный подход к исследо-
ванию. Значительным шагом в этом направлении послужили книги (Jørgensen 
& Phillips 2002, Titscher et al. 2000), авторы которых ставили цель упорядочить 
методологическую базу лингвистической теории дискурса как сравнительно 
молодого направления языкознания. 

Еще одна трудность методологического характера связана с междисци-
плинарным статусом теории дискурса. Теория дискурса, или дискурс-анализ, 
приоритизирует язык, общество и человека, а это, в свою очередь, требует 
исследований на стыке различных областей знаний. Соответственно, теория 
дискурса использует междисциплинарные методы анализа, к примеру работу 
с корпусами (Чернявская 2017, 2018), для решения поставленных задач. 
Именно междисциплинарность является неотъемлемым принципом дискурс-
анализа, критического дискурс-анализа (CDA) или исследований критиче-
ского дискурса (CDS). Й. Унгер (Unger 2016) считает, что в этом подходе про-
является естественная потребность лингвистов преодолевать «иногда устой-
чивые и жесткие дисциплинарные границы лингвистики» (Unger 2016: 2). 

238  



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

Этот подход используется при анализе контекста на уровне теоретического 
осмысления, выбора методов и сбора эмпирических данных в рамках дис-
курс-анализа или CDА. При этом используются данные разнообразных науч-
ных областей (таких как социология, психология, когнитивная наука, фило-
софия и т.д.). Дискурс-анализ, кроме того, применяет методологию различ-
ных направлений лингвистических исследований (лингвистика текста, кор-
пусная лингвистика, этнография и т. д.) и исследует все, что связано с исполь-
зованием языка (Unger 2016: 2). 

Все эти проблемы активно обсуждаются в рамках теории дискурса и 
смежных с нею областей научного знания, о чем свидетельствует как большое 
количество соответствующих публикаций, так и количество конференций по 
этой актуальной тематике. Так, идею к созданию данного номера дала конфе-
ренция "Язык в современных дискурсивных практиках", которая состоялась 
в Москве, в РУДН, в Институте современных языков, межкультурной комму-
никации и миграции 22—23 октября 2019 года. Выступления пленарных до-
кладчиков, среди которых были Мириам А. Лохэр (Базельский университет, 
Швейцария), Лаура Альба-Хуэс (UNED, Мадрид), Даниэль Кадар (Академия 
наук Венгрии и Далянский университет иностранных языков), Магдалена 
Била и Ингрида Ванькова (Университет Прешова, Словакия), Моника Копы-
товска (Университет Лодзи, Польша), показали, что исследование дискурсив-
ных практик проводится на базе самых разных типов дискурса и касается вы-
ражения эмоций, вежливости и невежливости, языка вражды и др. Проведен-
ные в рамках конференции дискуссии еще раз подтвердили стремление ис-
следователей найти закономерности функционирования языка в обществе в 
связке с человеком говорящим, думающим, чувствующим.  

 
4. Авторы этого выпуска 

Наш выпуск выходит в непростое время, и мы благодарны всем тем, кто 
продолжает работать и делиться с нами своими идеями, мыслями, в том числе 
далеко выходящими за рамки лингвистики. Этот выпуск начинается с обра-
щения Анны Вежбицкой ко всем нам, объединенным в нашей общей борьбе 
против пандемии, которая приобрела форму глобального социального собы-
тия. Анна Вежбицкая делится семью важными мыслями, которые она выра-
жает при помощи разработанного ею Естественного Семантического Мета-
языка (Goddard & Wierzbicka 2014, Wierzbicka 1996), позволяющего одина-
ково точно передавать мысли и чувства на всех языках мира. Она смогла 
найти правильные и понятные слова, которые звучат как своего рода ориен-
тиры. Мы можем только надеяться, что они помогут нам справиться со слож-
ностями и трудностями этого периода, найти новые перспективы и оставаться 
позитивными.  

Все работы, представленные на страницах настоящего специального вы-
пуска, обращены к анализу дискурсивных практик. Исследуя в различных ра-
курсах особенности взаимодействия языка, культуры и идеологии сквозь 

  239 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

призму дискурса, авторы тем самым расширяют и уточняют наши знания о 
происходящих на микро- и макроуровнях процессах общественной жизни. 
В основе представленных исследований лежит идея о том, что дискурс сосре-
доточен на социальной конструкции значения (Williams 1999: 5). 

Выпуск открывает статья Анны Вежбицкой, в которой она анализирует, 
как люди, говорящие на различных европейских языках, обращаются к Богу. 
Каждая лингвокультура имеет свои характерные способы обращения к Богу, 
закодированные в определенных словах, фразах и грамматических формах, 
которые отражают и формируют привычные способы мышления говорящих 
о Боге и отношения к Богу. Зачастую они также отражают и другие аспекты 
культурной памяти и исторического опыта человека говорящего. В связи с 
этим автор прибегает к культурному комментарию о более широких истори-
ческих явлениях. Цель, которую ставит перед собой автор, соответствует по-
ниманию того, что, будучи носителями культуры, люди проявляют себя через 
стандартизированные манеры аккомодационного поведения. Результаты ис-
следования показывают, что каждый европейский язык предлагает своим 
пользователям различные варианты обращения к Богу. Некоторые из этих оп-
ций являются общими; другие характеризуются лингвокультурной уникаль-
ностью. Тем не менее, как утверждает автор, причины различий всех этих об-
ращений еще предстоит изучить. 

В ходе социализации люди развивают различные (словесные) модели по-
ведения и различные способы интерпретации мира, что приводит к появле-
нию множества языковых сообществ (Dolník, 2015). В трех последующих ста-
тьях текущего номера рассматривается связь идеологии, идентичности и 
языка в различных дискурсивных практиках в разных языковых сообществах. 
Идеология характеризует социальные группы, определяет, но и определяется 
их социальными практиками.  

Язык окружает нас, пронизывая нашу общественную и личную жизнь, 
материализуясь в форме речевых звуков и отображаясь в текстах в виде вы-
весок магазинов, объявлений, плакатов, рекламных лозунгов и т.д. Мартин 
Пютц исследует языковой ландшафт Камеруна и делится своими размышле-
ниями о языковой политике и идеологии. Он останавливается на языковом 
ландшафте как на относительно недавней области исследований, которую он 
определяет как визуальную представленность языков в публичном простран-
стве. Языковой ландшафт Камеруна репрезентирован английским, француз-
ским, пиджин-английским, камфранглийским и, в меньшей степени, корен-
ными африканскими языками. Исследование Мартина Пютца показывает, что 
область языковых ландшафтов может выступать в качестве отражения языко-
вых иерархий, идеологий и актов сопротивления в многоязычных и много-
культурных сообществах. Кроме того, в Камеруне языковой ландшафт почти 
исключительно сосредоточен на доминирующем статусе и роли одного от-
дельного языка, то есть французского и, в меньшей степени, английского, по-

240  



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

этому англоговорящие граждане чувствуют себя в определенной степени мар-
гинализированными. Несомненный интерес данной публикации связан с ис-
пользуемой автором методологией: в работе анализу подвергнуты более 600 
лингвистических токенов (цифровых фотографий), которые были собраны в 
различных общественных местах, главным образом в и вокруг столицы Каме-
руна Яунде. 

Как известно, изучение дискурса началось со стремления исследовать по-
литику и власть, выраженную в языке и посредством языка (Фуко 1981: 1994). 
Это направление дискурсивных исследований не теряет своей актуальности 
и пополняется новыми публикациями, о чем свидетельствует и статья  
Стефани Муди и Зохрэ Еслами. Они обращаются к проблематике политиче-
ского дискурса в той части, которая касается особенностей кодовых переклю-
чений и выражения идеологии. Авторы сосредоточивают свое внимание на 
механизмах манипулирования, внушения и убеждения, присущих языку. Они 
изучают дискурсивные практики, связанные с переключением языковых ко-
дов в процессе речевой деятельности, в рамках которых дву- и многоязычные 
участники коммуникации гибко используют весь свой лингвистический ре-
пертуар для создания смысла. Переключение кодов, фиксируя историческую, 
политическую и социальную встроенность языковых практик в речевую дея-
тельность человека в социуме, свидетельствует о том, что эти дискурсивные 
практики напрямую связаны с идеологиями. Основываясь на концепции язы-
ковых идеологий, авторы ставят своей целью определение того, как кодовые 
переключения использовались сенатором Кейном в политическом дискурсе и 
как эти случаи варьировали в зависимости от контекста каждой речи. Иссле-
дование показывает, как можно использовать кодовые переключения для 
формирования политического капитала, создания альянсов и демонстрации 
культурного сходства между белыми политиками и их дву- и многоязычными 
избирателями. Представленное исследование служит иллюстрацией глубо-
кого замечания Т. ван Дейка о том, что «идеологии выражаются и, как пра-
вило, воспроизводятся в социальных практиках их членов и, в частности, при-
обретаются, подтверждаются, изменяются и увековечиваются посредством 
дискурса» (van Dijk 2006: 115). 

Проблематика социальной идентичности в дискурсивных практиках рас-
крывается в работе Магдалены Била, Алены Качмаровой и Ингриды 
Ваньковой. Авторы сопоставляют две лингвокультуры сквозь призму соци-
ального дейксиса. Хорошо известен тот факт, что в большинстве языков, в 
основном европейских, передача социального дейксиса колеблется между 
двумя полюсами, которыми служат морфологические средства, формы ты и 
Вы. Авторы обращаются к исследованию словацкого и английского языков, 
которые, соответственно, различаются по наличию эксплицитных маркеров 
ты/Вы. Весьма интересна разработанная авторами пошаговая методика ис-
следования. Уникальность английской и словацкой культурной идентичности 

  241 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

и / или дискурсивная практика соответствующей культуры в отношении вы-
ражения социальной дистанции рассматриваются в два этапа. Во-первых, свя-
занные понятия (культурная идентичность, социальная дистанция, формы 
ты/Вы) подвергаются анализу посредством схемы концептуализации (уста-
новление кадра, кодирование / предварительное понимание, контекстуализа-
ция / значимость и конфигурация кода). Процесс концептуализации, включа-
ющий набор принципов, дал результаты, на основе которых были разрабо-
таны вопросники для испытуемых. Результаты исследования показывают, что 
концептуализация ты vs Вы, иначе говоря, неофициального в отличие от офи-
циального, может проистекать из концептуализации социальной дистанции с 
точки зрения набора принципов, концептуализации конкретного принципа с 
точки зрения типов отношений, концептуализации типа отношений с точки 
зрения конкретной культуры и концептуализации типа культуры с определен-
ной спецификой через морфологические средства (ты или Вы). 

Дискурсивные практики маркетингового дискурса веб-сайтов выступают 
объектом исследования, представленного в статье Н.В. Соколовой. Работа 
заслуживает особого внимания тех, кто интересуется сложной проблемой ме-
тодологии анализа мультимодальности в дискурсе. Автор выстраивает свой 
мультимодальный анализ, опираясь на положения критического дискурс-ана-
лиза, прагматики и лингвистики текста. Комплексный подход позволяет 
учесть ряд параметров: дискурсопорождающую интенцию адресанта, функ-
цию дискурса, реализацию категорий в вербальном контенте мультимодаль-
ного дискурса и использование аудиовизуальных приемов в невербальном 
контенте, глобальную идеологему, или ключевую идею, дискурса, а также ад-
ресата. Дискурсопорождающей интенцией является побуждение потребителя 
к приобретению ИТ-решения, при этом дискурс реализует воздействующую 
функцию. Текстовое наполнение веб-сайтов рассматривается в рамках таких 
категорий, как тема (терминология сферы информационных технологий); то-
нальность (положительно окрашенная лексика; повелительное наклонение); 
хронотоп (экономия времени для решения глобальных задач в рамках всего 
предприятия). Анализ показывает, что в рамках маркетинговых дискурсов 
трех компаний используются сходные антитезы (проблемы работы с боль-
шим количеством данных vs. одно ИТ-решение, ситуация до и после, старое 
vs. новое), аналогична и реализация категорий и аудиовизуальных приемов, 
что может потребовать дальнейших исследований маркетингового дискурса 
с точки зрения восприятия его специфичности клиентами. 

Дискурсивные практики, связанные с жанровыми разновидностями тек-
стов, репрезентирующих дискурс, являются объектом анализа следующей 
публикации. С.В. Иванова и Г.Ш. Хакимова исследуют слухи о знаменито-
стях как жанр в англоязычном дискурсе СМИ. Цель исследования авторы ви-
дят в выявлении специфики медиаслухов как речевого жанра англоязычной 
медиакоммуникации. Соответственно, авторы обращаются к содержатель-
ному (тематическому) и формальному (структурно-композиционному)  

242  



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

уровням исследования. В работе выявляются дистинктивные признаки изуча-
емого жанра, включающие установленные для него ограничения, и диапазон 
обсуждаемых тем. Анализ эмпирического материала свидетельствует, что  
тематически изучаемые тексты отличаются широким диапазоном топосов, 
охватывающих как публичную сферу (социальные взаимодействия), так 
и приватную, зачастую интимную область жизни знаменитостей, с явным 
предпочтением последней. Доминантными дискурсивными характеристи-
ками репрезентаций исследуемого текстотипа являются сенсационность 
и скандальность. В структурном плане дискурс светских слухов конституи-
руется текстами, облеченными в различные журналистские формы: от жанров 
информационного блока до публицистических вариаций категории features, 
которые используются авторами в качестве средства конструирования реаль-
ности, связанной с культурой селебрити. Информация, имеющая, по сути, 
тривиальный по содержанию и сомнительный в силу своей неподтвержден-
ности характер, с помощью разнообразных языковых и текстовых ресурсов 
камуфлируется под сведения, обладающие высокой степенью достоверности 
и эпистемической ценности. Полученные результаты свидетельствуют  
о существовании в рамках обширного коммуникативного пространства  
массмедиа специфического типа дискурса, гибридного по своей природе и 
практически не поддающегося верификации. 

А.А. Романов и О.В. Новоселова раскрывают прагматическую эффек-
тивность реализации высказываний-угроз (менасивных высказываний или 
менасивов) в политической коммуникации, а именно авторы ставят своей це-
лью установить целесообразность использования угрозы в предвыборных 
программах с тем, чтобы побудить избирателей проголосовать за конкретного 
политика. Авторы анализируют высказывания-угрозы, реализованные в пред-
выборных программах кандидатов на пост Президента Российской Федера-
ции в 2018 году. При анализе применяется инструментарий теории речевой 
деятельности, теории речевых актов и психосемантики. В ходе исследования 
выделено 18 адресатных разновидностей высказываний-угроз, которые обла-
дают определенным прагма-эмоциональным воздействием на избирателей и 
характеризуются различной частотностью употребления в предвыборных 
программах. Полученный результат свидетельствует о недостаточном знании 
авторами предвыборных программ предпочтений массового избирателя, его 
эмоционального состояния и переживаний. Это обусловливает ориентирован-
ность менасивного воздействия на широкий круг потенциальных избирате-
лей. Авторы приходят к выводу, что политики целенаправленно предпочи-
тают использовать высказывания-угрозы, эксплицирующие последующий 
негативный эффект для нефокусной аудитории, пытаясь таким образом заво-
евать внимание и голоса избирателей. Кроме того, проведенный анализ пока-
зывает, что использование политиком четырех разновидностей высказыва-
ний-угроз с различной адресатной направленностью консеквентного  

  243 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

компонента является прагматически эффективным инструментом воздей-
ствия в контексте российского предвыборного дискурса 2018 года.  

Статья С.М. Пашкова раскрывает проблематику изучения эмоций и их 
отражения в дискурсивных практиках в рамках религиозного дискурса. В ре-
зультате анализа автор классифицирует языковые репрезентанты эмоций, ат-
рибутируемых Богу библейскими персонажами. На основе изучения бого-
словского понимания антиномии «неизменность Бога — эмоции Бога» в ста-
тье обосновывается (1) введение термина «атрибуция эмоций» в понятийно-
терминологический аппарат лингвистики эмоций, эксплицирующего специ-
фику библейских эмотивных смыслов; (2) рассмотрение изображенного биб-
лейского пространства в эмотивном аспекте; (3) интерпретация изображен-
ной деятельности библейских персонажей в качестве причины эмоций, атри-
бутируемых Богу. Языковой материал проанализирован с опорой на понятие 
эмоционального сценария, позволяющего представить системное описание 
развития эмоции, то есть причину ее появления и реакцию. Методы исследо-
вания языкового материала включают дефиниционный, контекстуальный, 
эмотивный и лингвостилистический анализы с привлечением факторов ши-
рокого историко-культурного контекста. В результате исследования автором 
установлены и систематизированы: 1) языковые средства, репрезентирующие 
причины эмоций, атрибутируемых Богу; 2) языковые средства репрезентиру-
ющие эмоции, атрибутируемые Богу; 3) языковые средства, репрезентирую-
щие пространство, воспринимаемое библейскими персонажами как «реак-
ция» на атрибутируемые Богу эмоции. Полученные результаты позволили 
наполнить языковым содержанием одну из антиномий христианского пони-
мания Бога и наметить перспективу дальнейшего лингвистического исследо-
вания христианской догматики в эмотивном ракурсе.  

Составители данного выпуска посчитали, что завершающей для этого 
журнала должна стать статья Л.Н. Синельниковой, которая тематически 
венчает представленную вниманию читателей коллекцию статей и выводит 
проблему дискурса и дискурсивных практик в сопредельные области науч-
ного знания. Данная публикация раскрывает меж- и трансдисциплинарные 
свойства дискурсивных исследований. Автор обращается к исследованию по-
граничных дискурсов и ставит своей целью обоснование научной состоятель-
ности понятия фронтирного дискурса, концептуальная среда которого скла-
дывается в условиях наложения двух многоуровневых феноменов: дискурса 
и фронтира. Фронтир как подвижная граница представлен в интернет-комму-
никациях, в социально-культурном пространстве современного города, в по-
веденческих нормах элиты, во внутрисемейных отношениях и многих других 
концептуальных сферах, список которых, по онтологическим признакам 
фронтира, принципиально открыт. В статье названы векторы расширения 
междисциплинарных возможностей фронтира в науке в условиях дискурс-
ного подхода. Автор показывает роль фронтирного модуса в интерпретации 
художественных текстов, сюжет, стиль и образы которых проектируются на 

244  



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

национальную историю, культуру, ментальность в их порубежных характе-
ристиках (by-border characteristics). Нельзя не согласиться с автором, что  
такие признаки фронтира, как неустойчивость, способность создавать кон-
тактную зону (зону взаимодействия), при определенных условиях ведущую 
к интеграции, важны для понимания проблемы современной языковой,  
речевой и жанровой нормы. Территория порубежья (то, что находится между) 
является местом сбора нарушений традиционных норм и вместе с тем мате-
риалом для прогноза нарождающихся изменений нормы. Трансформация тра-
диционных жанров и формирование новых также происходит на фронтирных 
территориях.  

Текущий выпуск содержит рецензии двух изданий, тесно связанных 
с изучаемой тематикой и проблематикой. Эцуко Оиси рецензирует книгу, 
вышедшую под редакцией известных исследователей теории не/вежливости 
Дж. Калпепера, Майкла Хо и Даниела Кадара (Culpeper, Jonathan, Michael 
Haugh and Dániel Z. Kádár (eds.). 2017. The Palgrave Handbook of Linguistic 
(Im)politeness, London: Palgrave Macmillan). В своем обзоре рецензент отме-
чает желаемый баланс между теорией и практикой, который в полной мере 
удалось достичь авторам. Книга по-новому раскрывает концепцию невежли-
вости: невежливость, как, собственно, и вежливость проявляются в страте-
гиях непосредственного общения, их можно достичь в рамках дискурса.  

Марианна Рышина-Панкова рецензирует книгу, вышедшую под редак-
цией двух известных исследователей эмоций в дискурсе Дж. Лахлана  
Маккензи и Лауры Альба-Хуэс (Mackenzie, J. Lachlan and Laura Alba-Juez 
(eds.). 2019. Emotion in Discourse). Книга знаменует собой то, что в гумани-
тарных науках называют «эмоциональным поворотом», особенно в том, что 
касается изучения языка (см. также специальный выпуск этого журнала, по-
священный данной теме — 2018,1). В книге раскрывается исключительная 
важность эмоций в общении между людьми и показано, как посредством 
языка и через язык создаются эмоции. Представляя последние теоретические 
и эмпирические исследования по этому вопросу, книга призвана дать подроб-
ный анализ взаимодействия эмоций, языка, владения языком, культурой 
и дискурсом. 

 
5. Обсуждение и перспективы 

Появление дискурс-анализа как направления научного поиска связано 
с осознанием необходимости исследовать главный объект гуманитарной 
науки — человека в его социальном окружении. Дискурс-анализ в качестве 
отправной точки базируется на утверждении структурной и постструктура-
листской лингвофилософии о том, что мы всегда получаем доступ к реально-
сти через язык (Jørgensen & Phillips 2002: 8). Прескриптивизм и норматив-
ность предшествующих этапов развития лингвистики уступили место иссле-
дованию языка в его непосредственном функционировании. Именно язык как 
он есть здесь и сейчас стал прерогативой и безусловным приоритетом  

  245 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

лингвистических исследований начала XXI века. Современная исследова-
тельская практика показывает, что эта парадигма далеко еще себя не исчер-
пала. Дискурс-аналитикам предстоит отвечать на вечные вопросы лингви-
стики о том, как функционирует человеческий язык, когда человек использует 
его для достижения конкретных коммуникативных целей в той или иной со-
циальной среде. Публикации, которые вы найдете в настоящем выпуске, сви-
детельствуют о том, что «анализ дискурса находится в постоянной эволюции 
и продолжает расширяться в диапазоне и масштабах своей исследовательской 
деятельности» (Ponton, Larina 2017: 12), и мы не можем не согласиться с этим. 
Лингвисты все еще разрабатывают и обосновывают целостную в своей  
совокупной объяснительной силе, интегрированную с пограничными обла-
стями теорию дискурса, которая должна свести воедино многие переменные, 
чтобы они сложились в единую картину под названием «человек—язык— 
общество». 

 
© Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana Ivanova, 2020 

 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License 

https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 
 

 
REFERENCES /СПИСОК ЛИТЕРАТУРЫ 

Alba-Juez, Laura & Tatiana V. Larina. 2018. Language and emotion: Discourse-pragmatic 
perspectives. Russian Journal of Linguistics 22 (1). 9—37.  

Alexander, Richard & Arran Stibbe. 2014. From the analysis of ecological discourse to the 
ecological analysis of discourse. Language Sciences 41. 104—110.  

Beard, Adrian. 2000. The Language of Politics. NY: Routledge.  
Bednarek, Monika. 2006. Epistemological positioning and evidentiality in English news 

discourse: a text-driven approach. Text and Talk 26 (6). 635—660.  
Bell, Allan & Peter Garett. 1998. Approaches of media discourse. Oxford: Blackwell 

Publishers.  
Blommaert, Jan. 2005. Discourse. Cambridge. Cambridge University Press. 
Bacchi, Carol & Jennifer Bonham. 2014. Reclaiming discursive practices as an analytic focus: 

Political implications. Foucault Studies 17. 173—192. 
Bousfield, Derek. 2008. Impoliteness in Interaction. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing 

Company. 
Bousfield, Derek & Miriam A. Locher (eds.). 2008. Impoliteness in Language. Studies on its 

Inter-play with Power in Theory and Practice. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Cap, Piotr & Urszula Okulska. 2013. Analyzing Genres in Political Communication: Theory 

and Practice. John Benjamins Publishing. 
Chernyavskaya, Valeria E. 2017. Metodologitscheskie vosmoznosti diskursivnogo analiza v 

korpusnoi lingvistike [Towards methodological application of discourse analysis in 
corpus-driven linguistics]. Tomsk State University Journal of Philology 50. 135—148. 
DOI: 10.17223/19986645/50/9. 

246  



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

Chernyavskaya, Valeria E. 2018. Diskursivnyy analiz i korpusnyye metody: neobkhodimoye 
dokazatel'noye zveno? Ob"yasnitel'nyye vozmozhnosti kachestvennogo i 
kolichestvennogo podkhodov [Discourse analysis and corpus approaches: a missing 
evidence-based link? Towards qualitative and quantitative approaches]. Voprosy 
Kognitivnoy Lingvistiki 2. 31—37. DOI: 10.20916/1812-3228-2018-2-31-37. 

Chilton, Paul. 2004. Analysing Political Discourse: Theory and Practice. NY: Routledge.  
Chomsky, Noam. 1965. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press. 
Christie, Frances. 2002. Classroom Discourse Analysis. A Functional Perspective. London, 

New York: Continuum. 
Cook, Guy. 1992. The Discourse of Advertising. London and New York: Routledge. 
Corbett, James. 2009. Genre and Genre Analysis. In Jacob L. Mey (eds.), Concise Encyclopedia 

of Pragmatics. 2nd edn. Oxford: Elsevir Ltd. 
Crystal, David. 2010. Internet Linguistics. London, New York: Routledge. 
Culpeper, Jonathan. 2011. Impoliteness. Using Language to Cause Offence. Cambridge: 

Cambridge University Press.  
Culpeper, Jonathan, Michael Haugh & Dániel Z. Kádár (eds.). 2017. Palgrave Handbook of 

Linguistic (Im)Politeness. London: Palgrave.  
Dementyev, Vadim. 2016. Speech genres and discourse: Genres study in discourse analysis 

paradigm. Russian Journal of Linguistics 20 (4). 103—121.  
Dobrosklonskaya, Tatiana G. 2014. Massmedijnyj diskurs kak ob"ekt nauchnogo opisaniya 

[Mass media discourse as an object of scientific description]. Nauchnye vedomosti. Seriya 
Gumanitarnye nauki 13 (184). 22. 181—187. 

Dolník, Ján. 2015. Človek — jazyk — kultúra. Kaligram.  
Dubrovskaya, Tatiana. 2017. Metapragmatics of Аdministering Justice in Russian and English 

Judicial Discourse. Russian Journal of Linguistics 21 (1). 73—90. 
Dubrovskaya, Tatiana & Evgeniy Kozhemyakin. 2016. Media construction of Russia’s 

international relations: specifics of representations. Critical Discourse Studies 14 (1).  
90—107. DOI: 10.1080/17405904.2016.1196228. 

Eelen, Gino. 2001. A Critique of Politeness Theories. Manchester: St Jerome.  
Fairclough, Norman. 1989. Language and Power. London: Longman. 
Fairclough, Norman. 1992. Discourse and Social Change. Cambridge: Cambridge Polity Press. 
Fairclough, Norman. 2001. The dialectics of discourse. Textus 2 (14). 231—242. 
Fairclough, Norman. 2003. Analysing discourse: Textual analysis for social research. London: 

Routledge. 
Fairclough, Norman. 2010. Critical Discourse Analysis: The critical study of language. 2nd 

edn. Harlow: Longman. 
Fairclough, Norman. 2014. Language and Power. 3rd edn. Routledge.  
Fernández-Amaya, Lucía. 2019. Disagreement and (im)politeness in a Spanish family 

members’ WhatsApp group. Russian Journal of Linguistics 23 (4). 1065—1087. DOI: 
10.22363/2312-9182-2019-23-4-1065-1087. 

Foucault, Michel. 1981. The Order of Discourse. In Robert Young (eds.), Untying the Text: 
A Post-Structuralist Reader, 51—78. Boston, London and Henley: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul.  

Foucault, Michel. 1994. The Order of Things. An Archeology of the Human Sciences: 
A translation of Les Mots et les choses. New York: Vintage Books, a Division of Random 
House Inc. 

Fowler, Roger. 1991. Language in the News. London & New York: Routledge. 
Fuentes Rodríguez, Catalina & Gloria Álvarez-Benito. 2016. A Gender-based Approach to 

Parliamentary Discourse: The Andalusian Parliament. John Benjamins.  

  247 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

Fullagar, Simone. 2002. Governing the healthy body: Discourses of leisure and lifestyle within 
Australian health policy. Health: An Interdisciplinary Journal for the Social Study of 
Health, Illness and Medicine 6 (1). 69—84. 

Garcés-Conejos Blitvich, Pilar. 2010. A genre approach to the study of im-politeness. 
International Review of Pragmatics 2. 46—94. 

Garcés-Conejos Blitvich, Pilar & Maria Sifianou. 2019. Im/politeness and discursive 
pragmatics. Journal of Pragmatics 145. 91—101. DOI: 10.1016/j.pragma.2019.03.015. 

Gee, James Paul. 2007. Introduction to Discourse Analysis: Theory and Method. New York 
and London: Routledge. 

Goddard, Cliff & Anna Wierzbicka. 2014. Words and Meanings: Lexical Semantics across 
Domains, Languages, and Cultures. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Good, Byron J. & Mary-Jo Del Vecchio Good. 1981. The Semantics of Medical Discourse. In 
Everett Mendelsohn & Yehuda Elkana (eds.), Sciences and Cultures. Sociology of the 
Sciences a Yearbook. 5. Springer, Dordrecht.  

Goodrich, Peter. 1987. Legal Discourse. London: Macmillan Press. 
Gorter, Durk. 2006. Introduction: The Study of the Linguistic Landscape as a New Approach 

to Multilingualism. International Journal of Multilingualism 3 (1). 1—6. 
Gotti, Maurizio & Christopher Williams. 2003. Legal Discourse across Languages and 

Cultures. Peter Lang. 
Hagege, Claude. 1985. L'Homme de paroles. Paris: Fayard. 
Harris, Zellig. S. 1952. Discourse Analysis. Language 28. 1—30. 
He, Agnes Weiyun. 2003. Discourse Analysis. In Mark Aronoff & Janie Rees-Miller (eds.), 

The Handbook of Linguistics. Blackwell Publishing.  
Hyland, Ken. 2009. Academic Discourse: English in a Global Context. Continuum. 
Issers, Oxana S. 2011. Diskursivnaya praktika kak nablyudayemaya real’nost’ [Discursive 

practice as an observable reality]. Vestnik Omskogo universiteta 4. 227—232.  
Ivanova, Svetlana V. 2017. Commencement Speech as a Hybrid Polydiscursive Practice. 

Russian Journal of Linguistics 21 (1). 141—160.  
Ivanova, Svetlana V. 2019. Stylistics and rhetoric of lifestyle discourse. Professional Discourse 

& Communication 1 (2). 8—21. DOI: https://doi.org/10.24833/2687-0126-2019-1-2-8-21. 
Jaworski, Adam & Crispin Thurlow. 2010. Tourism Discourse. Language and Global Mobility. 

Palgrave Macmillan UK.  
Johnstone, Barbara. 2018. Discourse Analysis. 3rd edn. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 
Jørgensen, Marianne & Louise Phillips. 2002. Discourse Analysis as Theory and Method. 

London, Thousand Oaks, New Delhi: SAGE Publications, Ltd. 
Kalyango Jr., Yusuf & Monika Kopytowska (eds.). 2014. Why discourse matters: Negotiating 

identity in the mediatized world. Peter Lang: New York.  
Karasik, Vladimir. 2002. Yazykovoj krug: lichnost', koncepty, diskurs [Language circle: 

personality, concepts, discourse]. Volgograd: Peremena.  
Kibrik, Andrei. A. 2009. Modus, zanr i parametry klassifikacii diskursov [Modus, genre and 

other parameters of discourse classification]. Voprosy Yazykoznanyja 2. 3—21. [Electronic 
resource]. URL: http://iling-ran.ru/kibrik/Discourse_classification@VJa_2009.pdf 
(Accessed 01 March 2019).  

Koshkarova, Natalya N. 2019. Linguistic, Pragmatic, and Stylistic Peculiarities of 2018 FIFA 
World Cup Representation in British Media-Discourse. Russian Journal of Linguistics 
23 (3). 802—819. DOI: 10.22363/2312-9182-2019-23-3-802-819. 

Langlotz, Andreas & Miriam A. Locher. 2017. (Im)politeness and emotion. In Jonathan 
Culpeper, Michael Haugh & Dániel Z. Kádár (eds.), Palgrave Handbook of Linguistic 
(Im)Politeness, 287—322. London: Palgrave.  

248  



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

Larina, Tatiana V., Vladimir I. Ozyumenko & Svetlana Kurteš. 2017. I-identity vs we-identity 
in language and discourse: Anglo-Slavonic perspectives. Lodz Papers in Pragmatics 
13 (1). 195—215. 

Larina, Tatiana, Vladimir Ozyumenko & Douglas Mark Ponton. 2019. Persuasion strategies in 
media discourse about Russia: linguistic ambiguity and uncertainty. Lodz papers in 
Pragmatics 15 (1) 3—22. DOI: https://doi .org/10.1515/lpp-2019-0002.  

Larina, Tatiana & Douglas M. Ponton (forthcoming). Tact or frankness: Intercultural 
pragmatics in the blind peer review genre. Intercultural Pragmatics. 

Leontovich, Olga A. 2019. New forms of urban discourse as a reflection of social change. 
Communication Studies (Russia) 6 (3). 645—654. DOI: 10.25513/2413-6182.2019. 
6(3).645-654.  

Locher, Miriam A. 2017. Reflective Writing in Medical Practice: A Linguistic Perspective. 
Bristol: MultilingualMatters. 

Locher, Miriam A. & Tatiana V. Larina. 2019. Introduction to politeness and impoliteness 
research in global contexts. Russian Journal of Linguistics 23 (4). 873—903. DOI: 
10.22363/2312-91822019-23-4-873-903. 

Macdonald, Myra. 2003. Exploring Media Discourse (Understanding Media Series). London: 
Arnold.  

Mackenzie, J. Lachlan & Laura Alba-Juez (eds.). 2019. Emotion in Discourse. Pragmatics and 
Beyond New Series 302. Amsterdam / Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing 
Company. 

Matheson, Donald. 2005. Media Discourses: Analysing Media Texts. Open University Press. 
Mills, Sara. 2003. Gender and politeness. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Molodychenko, Evgeni. 2016. Cennosti i ocenka v diskurse konsyumerizma: lingvo-

pragmaticheskij i kriticheskij analiz [Values and evaluation in discourse of consumerism: 
a pragmalinguistic analysis]. Filologiya. 122—130. DOI: 10.17238/issn2227-6564. 
2016.3.122. 

Molodychenko, Evgeni. 2020. Metasemiotic projects and lifestyle media: Formulating 
commodities as resources for identity enactment. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (1). 
117—136. DOI: 10.22363/2687-0088-2020-24-1-117-136.  

Montgomery, Martin. 2007. Discourse of Broadcast News: A Linguistic Approach. Routledge. 
Naydenova, Natalia S. 2018. Modern linguistics through post-secular perspective. Russian 

Journal of Linguistics 22 (4). 988—1000. DOI: 10.22363/2312-9182-2018-22-4- 
988-1000.  

Nefedov, Sergei T. & Valeria E. Сhernyavskaya. 2020. Context in linguistics: pragmatic and 
discourse analytical dimension. Tomsk State University Journal of Philology 63.  
83—97. DOI: 10.17223/19986645/63/5. 

Nunan David. 1993. Introducing Discourse Analysis. London: Penguin English.  
Olyanich, Andrey V. 2003. Gastronomicheskiy diskurs v sisteme massovoy kommunikatsii: 

semantiko-semioticheskiye kharakteristiki [Gastronomic discourse in the system of mass 
communication: semantic-semiotic specifications]. Massovaya kul'tura na rubezhe  
XX—XXI vekov: chelovek i ego diskurs, 167—201. Moscow.  

Ozyumenko, Vladimir. 2017. Media discourse in an atmosphere of information warfare: From 
manipulation to aggression. Russian Journal of Linguistics 21(1). 203—220.  

Ponton, Douglas. 2016. Movement and meaning: Towards an integrated approach to political 
discourse analysis. Russian Journal of Linguistics 20 (4). 122 —139. 

Ponton, Douglas & Tatiana V. Larina. 2016. Discourse analysis in the 21st century: Theory and 
practice (I). Russian Journal of Linguistics 21 (1). 7—25.  

Ponton, Douglas & Tatiana V. Larina. 2017. Discourse analysis in the 21st century: Theory and 
practice (II). Russian Journal of Linguistics 20 (4). 7—21.  

  249 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

Talbot, Mary. 2007. Media Discourse: Representation and Interaction. Edinburgh University 
Press. 

van Dijk, Teun A. (eds.). 1985. Discourse and Communication. New Approaches to the 
Analysis of Mass Media Discourse and Communication. Series: Research in Text Theory 
10. De Gruyter. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110852141. 

van Dijk, Teun A. 1988. News as discourse. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
van Dijk, Teun A. 2006. Ideology and discourse analysis. Journal of Political Ideologies, 

Routledge, 11 (2). 115—140. 
van Dijk, Teun A. 2009. Society and Discourse: How Social Contexts Influence Text and Talk. 

Cambridge University Press.  
van Dijk, Teun A. (eds.). 2011. Discourse Studies: A Multidisciplinary introduction. SAGE. 
Resta, Simonetta. 1998. Words and social change. The impact of power and ideology on the 

language of Economics and Law, Asp 19—22. [Electronic resource]. URL: 
http://journals.openedition.org/asp/2760. (Accessed 14 March 2020). DOI : 
https://doi.org/10.4000/asp.2760 

Saville-Troike, Muriel. 1994. Communicative Competence. In Ronald E. Asher (eds.), The 
Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics 2. 538. Oxford, New York, Seoul, Tokyo: 
Pergamon Press. 

Schiffrin, Deborah. 1995. Approaches to Discourse. Blackwell. 
Shahovsky, Victor I. 2015. Golos emotsiy v yazykovom kruge homo sentiens [Voice of emotion 

in the linguistic circle of homo sentiens]. 3rd edn. Moscow: Knizhnyj dom «LIBROKOM» 
Publ.  

Shakhovsky, Victor I. 2018. The Cognitive Matrix of Emotional-Communicative Personality. 
Russian Journal of Linguistics 22 (1). 54—79. DOI: 10.22363/2312-9182-2018-22-1-54-79. 

Sheigal, Elena. 2004. Semiotika politicheskogo diskursa [Political discourse semiotics]. 
Moscow: Gnozis.  

Sériot, Patrick. 1999. Kak chitayut teksty vo Francii [How they read texts in France]. 
Kvadratura smysla. Frantsuskaya škola analiza diskursa, 12—53. M.: Progress. 

Sériot, Patrick. 2012. Structure and the Whole. East, West and Non-Darwinian Biology in the 
Origins of Structural Linguistics / Translated from French by Amy Jacobs-Colas. Mouton 
De Gruyter. 

Skålén, Per, Martin Fougère & Markus Fellesson. 2008. Marketing Discourse: A Critical 
Perspective. London & New York: Routledge.  

Solopova, Olga & Anatoly Chudinov. 2018. Diachronic Analysis of Political Metaphors in the 
British Corpus: from Victory Bells to Russia’s V-Day. Russian Journal of Linguistics 
22 (2). 313—337. DOI: 10.22363/2312-9182-2018-22-2-313-337.  

Titscher, Stefan, Michael Meyer, Ruth Wodak & Eva Vetter. 2000. Methods of Text and 
Discourse Analysis: In Search of Meaning. 1st edn. SAGE Publications Ltd. 

Unger, Johann W. 2016. The interdiciplinarity of critical discourse studies research. Palgrave 
communications.  

Watts, Richard. 2003. Politeness. Cambridge. Cambridge University press.  
Williams, Glyn. 1999. French Discourse Analysis. The method of post-structuralism. London 

and New York: Routledge. 
Yule, George. 1999. The Study of Language. 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press. 
Бобырева Е.В. Религиозный дискурс: ценности, жанры, стратегии: (на материале право-

славного вероучения). Волгоград: Перемена, 2007. 
Дементьев В.В. Жанры речи и дискурс: место жанроведческих исследований в пара-

дигме дискурс-анализа // Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2016. Т. 20. № 4. С. 103—121. 
Добросклонская Т.Г. Массмедийный дискурс как объект научного описания // Научные 

ведомости. Серия Гуманитарные науки. 2014. № 13 (184). Вып. 22. С. 181—187. 

250  



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. 2020. Russian Journal of Linguistics 24 (2). 219—252 

Дубровская Т.В. Метапрагматика осуществления правосудия в дискурсе российских и 
английских судей // Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2017. Т. 21. № 1. С. 73—90. 

Иванова С.В. Актовая речь как гибридная полидискурсивная практика // Russian Journal 
of Linguistics. 2017. Т. 21. № 1. С. 141—160. 

Иванова С.В. Стилистика и риторика лайфстайл-дискурса // Дискурс профессиональной 
коммуникации. 2019. № 1 (2). С. 8—21. 

Иссерс О.С. Дискурсивная практика как наблюдаемая реальность // Вестник Омского 
университета. 2011. № 4. С. 227—232. 

Карасик В.И. Языковой круг: личность, концепты, дискурс. Волгоград, 2002.  
Кибрик А.А. Модус, жанр и другие параметры классификации дискурсов. Вопросы язы-

кознания. 2009. № 2. С. 3—21. [Электронный ресурс]. URL: http://iling-ran.ru/kibrik/ 
Discourse_classification@VJa_2009.pdf (дата обращения: 01.03.2020). 

Кошкарова Н.Н. Лингвопрагматические и жанрово-стилистические особенности репре-
зентации чемпионата мира по футболу 2018 г. в британском медиадискурсе // 
Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2019. Т. 23. № 3. С. 802—819. DOI: 10.22363/2312-
9182-2019-23-3-802-819. 

Леонтович О.А. Новые формы урбанистического дискурса и их социальные истоки // 
Коммуникативные исследования. 2019. Т. 6. № 3. С. 645—654. DOI: 10.25513/2413-
6182.2019.6(3).645-654. 

Молодыченко Е.Н. Ценности и оценка в дискурсе консюмеризма: лингво-прагматиче-
ский и критический анализ // Филология. 2016. С. 122—130. DOI: 10.17238/issn2227-
6564.2016.3.122. 

Молодыченко Е.Н. Метасемиотические проекты и лайфстайл-медиа: дискурсивные ме-
ханизмы превращения предметов потребления в ресурсы выражения идентичности 
// Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 1. С. 117—136. DOI: 10.22363/2687-
0088-2020-24-1-117-136. 

Найденова Н.С. Современная лингвистика в постсекулярной перспективе // Russian 
Journal of Linguistics. 2018. Т. 22. № 4. С. 988—1000. DOI: 10.22363/2312-9182-2018-
22-4-988-1000. 

Нефедов С.Т., Чернявская В.Е. Контекст в лингвистическом анализе: прагматическая и 
дискурсивно-аналитическая перспектива // Вестник Томского государственного 
университета. Филология. 2020. № 63. 83—97. DOI: 10.17223/19986645/63/5.  

Олянич А.В. Гастрономический дискурс в системе массовой коммуникации: семантико-
семиотические характеристики // Московская культура на рубеже XX-XXI веков: 
человек и его дискурс. М.: Институт языкознания РАН, 2003. С.167—201.  

Озюменко В.И. Медийный дискурс в ситуации информационной войны: от манипуля-
ции — к агрессии // Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2017. Т. 21. № 1. С. 203—220. 

Серио П. Как читают тексты во Франции // Квадратура смысла: Французская школа ана-
лиза дискурса. М.: Прогресс, 1999. С.12—53.  

Солопова О.А., Чудинов А.П. Диахронический анализ метафор в британском корпусе 
текстов: колокола победы и Russia’s V-Day // Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2018. 
Т. 22. № 2. С. 313—337.  

Чернявская В.Е. Методологические возможности дискурсивного анализа в корпусной 
лингвистике // Вестник Томского государственного университета. Филология. 2017. 
50. 135—148. DOI: 10.17223/19986645/50/9. 

Чернявская В.Е. Дискурсивный анализ и корпусные методы: необходимое доказательное 
звено? Объяснительные возможности качественного и количественного подходов // 
Вопросы когнитивной лингвистики. 2018. № 2. С. 31—37. DOI: 10.20916/1812-3228-
2018-2-31-37. 

  251 



Magdaléna Bilá and Svetlana V. Ivanova. Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2020. Т. 24. № 2. С. 219—252 

Шаховский В.И. Голос эмоций в языковом круге homo sentiens. Изд. 3-е, стер. М.: Книж-
ный дом «ЛИБРОКОМ», 2015.  

Шаховский В.И. Когнитивная матрица эмоционально-коммуникативной личности // 
Russian Journal of Linguistics. 2018. Т. 22. № 1. С. 54—79. DOI: 10.22363/2312-9182-
2018-22-1-54-79. 

Шейгал Е.И. Семиотика политического дискурса. М.: Гнозис, 2004. 

Bionotes: 
MAGDALÉNA BILÁ is Dr. of Philology, Full Professor at the Institute of British and 
American Studies, Faculty of Arts, The University of Prešov in Prešov. Her research 
interests include comparative and contrastive studies (juxtaposing English and Slovak), 
discourse analysis, and translation studies (conceptualization in a source and a target 
language). 
Contact information: 
Institute of British and American Studies, Faculty of Arts, University of Prešov, 
17 Novembra Street 1, 080 01 Prešov, Slovakia 
e-mail: magdalena.bila@unipo.sk 

SVETLANA V. IVANOVA is Dr. of Philology, Full Professor, Head of English Philology 
Department at Pushkin Leningrad State University. Research Interests: Media Linguistics, 
Cultural Linguistics, Discourse Analysis of Mass Media, Political Linguistics.  
Contact information: 
Pushkin Leningrad State University 
10, Peterburgskoye shosse, Saint-Petersburg, 196605, Russia 
e-mail: svet_victoria@mail.ru 
ORCID ID: 0000-0002-0127-9934 
Scopus Author ID: 57194882590 

Сведения об авторах: 
МАГДАЛЕНА БИЛА — доктор филологических наук, профессор Института британ-
ских и американских исследований гуманитарного факультета Прешовского универ-
ситета в Прешове. Ее научные интересы включают сопоставительное языкознание (со-
поставление английского и словацкого языков), анализ дискурса и переводоведение. 
Контактная информация:  
Institute of British and American Studies, Faculty of Arts, University of Prešov, 
17 Novembra street 1, 080 01 Prešov, Slovakia 
E-mail: magdalena.bila@unipo.sk  

СВЕТЛАНА ВИКТОРОВНА ИВАНОВА — доктор филологических наук, профес-
сор, заведующий кафедрой английской филологии Ленинградского государствен-
ного университета им. А.С. Пушкина, член редколлегии журнала Russian Journal of 
Linguistics. Сфера научных интересов: медиалингвистика, лингвокультурология, 
дискурс-анализ текстов СМИ, политическая лингвистика, теория текста. 
Контактная информация: 
Ленинградский государственный университет имени А.С. Пушкина 
196605, Россия, г. Санкт-Петербург, Пушкин, Петербургское шоссе, д. 10 
e-mail: svet_victoria@mail.ru 
ORCID ID: 0000-0002-0127-9934 
Scopus Author ID: 57194882590